AWARD OF INTEREST ARBITRATOR
In the Matter of Interest
Arbitration
Between
County of McHenry/McHenry County
Sheriff’s Department
and the

Opinion and Analysis,
Findings of Fact,
and Award
by
Arbitrator
Peter Feuille
in
ILRB No. S-MA-13-004
Unit III

Illinois Fraternal Order of
Police Labor Council
Date of Award:

March 20, 2014
APPEARANCES

For the Employer:
Mr. John H. Kelly, Ottosen Britz Kelly Cooper
Gilbert & DiNolfo, Ltd., Attorney
Mr. Robert Ivetic, Human Resources Director
Ms. Crystal Schilling, Human Resources Coordinator
Cmdr. Duane Cedergren, Administration Bureau Commander
Sgt. Carolyn Decman, Administration Sergeant
For the Union:
Mr. John R. Roche, Attorney
Mr. Richard Stomper, Field Representative
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The County of McHenry and the McHenry Sheriff’s Department
(“Employers” or “Employer”) and the Illinois Fraternal Order of
Police Labor Council (“Union”) negotiated to generate a successor
collective bargaining agreement (“CBA”) to succeed the 2008-2012
CBA that expired on November 30, 2012 (Union Exhibit 7 (“UX 7”)).
During their negotiations, which included mediation, the parties
reached agreement on almost all issues (UX 4) but were not able to

Page 2 of 17

reach agreement on one issue.

Accordingly, the Union invoked the

interest arbitration procedure specified in Section 14 of the
Illinois Public Labor Relations Act ("Section 14," “Act”).

The

parties selected the undersigned as Arbitrator, waived the
tripartite arbitration panel format and agreed that I would serve
as the sole Arbitrator, and the Illinois Labor Relations Board
("Board," “ILRB”) appointed me as the interest arbitrator in this
matter.
Additionally, the parties waived the Act’s requirement in
Section 14(d) that the hearing in this matter must commence within
15 days of the Arbitrator’s appointment, and the parties agreed to
waive/extend Section 14(d)'s hearing and other timelines to
accommodate the scheduling needs of the participants in this matter
(UX 1).

I am most grateful for the parties’ willingness to modify

the arbitration process timelines contained in Section 14,
particularly their extension of the time allowed for this Award to
be issued (60 days from the date briefs are received by the
Arbitrator; Tr. 56).
By mutual agreement, the parties held an arbitration hearing
on December 17, 2013, in Woodstock, IL.

This December 17 hearing

was stenographically recorded and a transcript was produced.

The

parties waived oral closing arguments at the hearing and instead
submitted written post-hearing briefs.

With the Arbitrator's final

receipt of these briefs and other post-hearing materials on
February 7, 2014, the record in this matter was closed.

Page 3 of 17

STATUTORY DECISION CRITERIA
Section 14(g) of the Act mandates that interest arbitrators
"shall adopt the last offer of settlement [on each economic issue]
which, in the opinion of the arbitration panel, more nearly
complies with the applicable factors prescribed in subsection (h)."
Section 14(h) of the Act requires that an interest arbitrator or
arbitration panel base the decision upon the following Section
14(h) criteria or "factors," as applicable.

These factors, in

their entirety, are:
(1)

The lawful authority of the employer.

(2)

Stipulations of the parties.

(3)

The interests and welfare of the public and the financial
ability of the unit of government to meet those costs.

(4)

Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of
the employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the
wages, hours and conditions of employment of other employees
performing similar services and with other employees
generally:
(A)
(B)

In public employment in comparable communities.
In private employment in comparable communities.

(5)

The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly
known as the cost of living.

(6)

The overall compensation presently received by the employees,
including direct wage compensation, vacations, holidays and
other excused time, insurance and pensions, medical and
hospitalization benefits, the continuity and stability of
employment and all other benefits received.

(7)

Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the
pendency of the arbitration proceedings.

(8)

Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are
normally or traditionally taken into consideration in the
determination of wages, hours and conditions of employment
through voluntary collective bargaining, mediation,
fact-finding, arbitration or otherwise between the parties, in
the public service or in private employment.

Page 4 of 17

The Act does not require that all of these factors or criteria
be applied to each unresolved item; instead, only those that are
"applicable."

In addition, the Act does not attach weights to

these decision factors, and therefore it is the Arbitrator's
responsibility to decide how each of the applicable criteria should
be weighed.

We will use the applicable criteria to make decisions

on the issue presented in this proceeding.

ANALYSIS, OPINION, AND FINDINGS OF FACT
The Parties
Employer.

The County of McHenry is a general purpose county

government that provides governmental services to McHenry County
citizens, including law enforcement and public safety services via
its Sheriff’s Department.

The County is located northwest of

Chicago and abuts the Wisconsin border.

The County has a growing

population, as can be seen in its 2010 Census population of 308,000
and its 2011 population estimate of 327,000 (UX 12).
The County has a total of about 1,300 employees, with most of
those employees represented in 10 different bargaining units (Tr.
37).
Union.

As of the date of the hearing in this matter, the

instant bargaining unit included about 75 full-time employees (UX
8), none of whom are sworn law enforcement personnel.

This unit

includes civilian employees of the Sheriff’s Department, including
Dispatchers, Auto Technicians, Court Security Officers, Process
Servers, Clerks, Secretaries, and so on (UX 8).

There are a total

of three units of represented employees in the Sheriff’s

Page 5 of 17

Department, including Unit I (Deputies), Unit II (Corrections), and
the instant Unit III (Civilians). All three of these units are
represented for the purposes of collective bargaining by the
Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council.

In addition,

there are seven other bargaining units of County employees located
in different parts of County government (Employer Exhibit 2 (“EX
2”)).

Issue and Final Offers
The record shows that the parties are at impasse over, and
have submitted final offer proposals on, the wage issue.

This is

the only unresolved issue in the instant proceeding (Tr. 12).
Wages are specified in Article XXV of the parties’ CBA.

The

parties agree that this is an “economic” employment term within the
meaning of Section 14 of the Act (UX 1).
As will be seen shortly, each party has submitted a three-year
wage offer, which means that the successor contract emerging from
this proceeding will cover the period December 1, 2012, through
November 30, 2015.

1. Wages (Article XXV)
Current.

Unit members currently are being paid their Article

XXV wages in effect during the 2011-2012 contract year ((UX 7).
During the pendency of the parties’ negotiations and subsequent
impasse, unit members have not received any general wage increases.
Each party has submitted a three-year wage offer that proposes wage

Page 6 of 17

increases to take effect on December 1, 2012, December 1, 2013, and
December 1, 2014.

The parties mutually agree that any wage

increases effective December 1, 2012, and December 1, 2013, will be
retroactive to those dates (EX 1, UX 2).

December 1 is the start

of the Employer’s fiscal year, and along with numerous other
Illinois bargaining parties the County and Union decided to have
their fiscal year serve as their contract year (December 1 –
November 30).
Employer’s Final Offer.

The Employer proposes a set of three-

year wage increases as follows: (1) effective December 1, 2012,
Article XXV wages be increased by 2.75 percent above their current
(2011-2012) amount; (2) effective December 1, 2013, contract wages
be increased by 3.0 percent above their 2012-2013 amount; and (3)
effective December 1, 2014, contract wages be increased by 2.5
percent above their 2013-2014 amount (UX 2).

If we set aside the

effect of compounding, the Employer has proposed a total wage
increase of 8.25 percent during the three-year life of the parties’
next contract.
In addition, the Employer proposes that the Auto Technicians’
wage schedule be compressed from 20 steps down to 15 steps
effective on December 1, 2012, with the new top step in the
compressed wage schedule paying essentially the same amount as the
top step under the previous 20-step schedule (EX 1).

Similarly,

the Employer proposes that the Dispatchers’ wage schedule be
compressed from 15 steps down to 12 steps effective on December 1,
2013, with the new top step in the compressed schedule paying
essentially the same amount as the top step under the previous 15-

Page 7 of 17

step schedule (EX 1).

As this indicates, both Auto Technicians and

Dispatchers would make their way upward through their respective
wage schedules and reach their top step wages faster than under the
current CBA.

As will be seen below, the Employer’s proposed

compressed wage schedules for Auto Technicians and Dispatchers are
identical to the Union’s proposed compressed wage schedules for
these two employee groups.

As this indicates, then, the only

difference between the parties’ two final offers is one-half of one
percentage point (0.5%) general wage increase for the 2014-2015
contract year (EX 1, UX 2).
The Employer supports its wage offer with a variety of
evidence.

The Employer argues that the totality of the evidence

supports the selection of its final offer.
Union’s Final Offer.

The Union proposes a set of three-year

wage increases as follows: (1) effective December 1, 2012, Article
XXV wage rates be increased by 2.75 percent above their current
(2011-2012) amount; (2) effective December 1, 2013, contract wage
rates be increased by 3.0 percent above their 2012-2013 amount; and
(3) effective December 1, 2014, contract wage rates be increased by
3.0 percent above their 2013-2014 amount (UX 2).

If we set aside

the effect of compounding, the Union has proposed a total wage
increase of 8.75 percent during the three-year life of the parties’
next contract.
In addition, the Union proposes that the Auto Technicians’
wage schedule be compressed from 20 steps down to 15 steps
effective on December 1, 2012, with the new top step in the
compressed wage schedule paying essentially the same amount as the

Page 8 of 17

top step under the previous 20-step schedule (UX 2).

Similarly,

the Union proposes that the Dispatchers’ wage schedule be
compressed from 15 steps down to 12 steps effective on December 1,
2013, with the new top step in the compressed schedule paying
essentially the same amount as the top step under the previous 15step schedule (UX 2).

As this description indicates, both Auto

Technicians and Dispatchers would make their way upward through
their respective wage schedules and reach their top step wages
faster than under the current CBA (UX 2).

I note that both parties

have submitted identical compressed wage schedules for Auto
Technicians and Dispatchers (EX 1, UX 2).
The Union supports its wage offer with a variety of evidence.
When viewing the totality of evidence in the record, the Union
argues that the evidence supports the selection of the Union’s
final offer.

Analysis
When we examine the evidence that the parties have submitted
in support of their proposals, we observe the following.
First, neither party submitted any evidence or arguments
directed at the lawful authority of the employer under the Section
14(h)(1) decision factor.

Accordingly, it will not be considered.

Second, under the stipulations of the parties’ decision factor
specified in Section 14(h)(2), there is an important stipulation
reached by the parties during the negotiations that preceded the
instant arbitration, and we will examine that stipulation later in
this section.

Page 9 of 17

Third, the ability to pay decision factor under Section
14(h)(3) has played only a de minimis role in this proceeding.

In

its brief, the Union devoted several pages to showing that McHenry
County is in very strong financial shape and could easily afford to
fund the Union’s final offer (Union Brief. pages 22-31 (“Un.Br. 2231”)).

For its part, the Employer argues that the Union’s proposed

3.0% raise in the third contract year, when added to the step
movement of employees still moving upward through their wage
schedules, results in an increased expenditure of taxpayer dollars.
In contrast, the Employer notes that its proposal for this same
year holds down the impact on the County budget (Employer Brief,
pages 4-5 (“Er.Br. 4-5”)).
When we consider how highly similar the parties’ wage offers
are, it is very difficult to use ability to pay evidence and
arguments to justify the selection of one offer over the other.
Moreover, neither party submitted any unit-specific cost
information to specify the dollar amount of the cost of these two
wage offers.

As noted above, the Union offer calls for wage

increases totaling 8.75%, plus the compressed wage schedules for
the Auto Technicians and the Dispatchers.

The Employer’s offer

calls for wage increases totaling 8.25%, plus the same compressed
wage schedules for Auto Technicians and Dispatchers.

The Union

presented several exhibits designed to show that the Employer’s
financial condition is very strong, and the Union concluded that
the Employer can afford to fund the Union’s offer.

The Employer

presented a less optimistic view of its fiscal condition than did
the Union, but the Employer presented no claim of inability to pay

Page 10 of 17

or that the selection of the Union’s offer would adversely affect
the Employer’s operations.

Although the Employer is in a strong

fiscal posture, I note that the Union’s offer does not deserve to
be selected simply because the Employer can afford to fund it.
Accordingly, I find that the ability to pay evidence is not helpful
when making a selection decision in this matter.
Fourth, I note that both parties submitted very little
external comparability evidence under the Section 14(h)(4) decision
factor.

As noted in the Union’s post-hearing brief, “In the

instant case, the parties simply did not rely upon external
comparables as a reference in the current round of negotiations for
this Collective Bargaining Agreement” (Un.Br. 15).

As a result of

the parties’ decisions to not rely on external comparables in this
matter, we will make our selection decision without relying upon
bargaining and arbitration developments in comparable communities.
Next, when we move to the internal comparability evidence
under Section 14(h)(4), we see that the Employer’s practice is to
try and be consistent with the wage increases across its bargaining
units, particularly the units in the Sheriff’s Department.
at the history of recent wage increases in the Sheriff’s
Department’s units, we see the following:

Looking

Page 11 of 17

TABLE 1
SHERIFF’S DEPT. % WAGE INCREASES
Unit
Unit I
(Deputies)
Unit II
(Corrections)

12/01/2011
2.75%

12/01/2012
3.00%

12/01/2013
3.00%

12/01/2014
__

2.00%

2.75%

3.00%

__

Unit III
(Civilians)
Source: EX 2.

3.25%

2.75%

3.00%

2.5% or 3.0%

We know that the wage increases in Unit III effective December 1,
2012, and also December 1, 2013, will be 2.75% and 3.0%,
respectively, because those are the final offers of both parties
for the wage increases scheduled for those dates.
When we examine the internal comparability evidence, we see
that this evidence supports the selection of either offer.

During

the years represented in Table 1 above, wage increases in Sheriff’s
Department bargaining units have ranged from 2.0% to 3.25% with an
average increase I calculate as 2.83% per year.

This average

increase provides somewhat more support for selecting the Union’s
final offer instead of the Employer’s offer.

When we expand the

scope of our internal search to include other bargaining units
elsewhere in County government, we see that there are two CBAs
which have wage increases specified for the contract year effective
December 1, 2014.

They include IUOE Local 150’s contract with the

County that includes the Facilities unit.

According to the

Employer, that CBA provides for a 3.0% increase effective December
1, 2014, in that unit (Er.Br. 6).

At the same time, the Employer

points out that the County’s contract with SEIU covering the
support staff at the Valley Hi Nursing Home specifies a 2.5%

Page 12 of 17

increase effective on December 1, 2014 (Er.Br. 6).

As this

preliminary evidence indicates, wage increases for the 2014
contract year in two other County bargaining units are in the 2.5%
– 3.0% range (EX 2), which provides us with little help in
selecting a final offer of either 2.5% or 3.0% in this matter.
Turning to the dimension of compressed wage schedules for Auto
Technicians and Dispatchers, I note that the Employer proposed both
of these compressed wage schedules, the Union accepted them (Un.Br.
9), and they are included in both final offers.
The Employer calls attention to the fact that, in addition to
the general or across-the-board wage increases specified in the
parties’ final offers, unit members will receive additional money
via step increases.

The Employer argues that these step increases

are significant and go a long way toward meeting increases in the
cost of living.

The Employer notes that the step plans in the

parties’ CBA provides an average of between 1.25% and 1.9% per year
in income to those employees who are still moving up through the
steps.

The Employer says these step increases are “new money” to

the employees receiving them.

The Employer says that when the

1.25% - 1.9% step movement is added to the 2.5% annual wage
increase proposed by the Employer in the third year, these
employees clearly gain against the CPI.
For its part, the Union downplays the importance of step
increases, noting that the wage amounts generated by step increases
are “old money” that is the result of bargains reached in prior
years.

The Union also notes that wage levels generated by step

increases provide an incentive for employees to remain with the

Page 13 of 17

Employer, which in turn provides the Employer and County citizens
with the benefit of an experienced workforce.

I note that both

parties’ arguments about step increases have merit, and thus I find
that this step increase information is not particularly helpful in
making a selection decision between these two final offers.
Next, Section 14(h)(5) specifies the cost of living decision
factor.

UX 14 contains a Consumer Price Index (“CPI”) chart for

the period 1982 - 2013.

The Employer points out that the CPI

change from December 1, 2011, to December 1, 2013, averaged 2.06%
(Er.Br. 7).

The Employer notes that during that same time period

the average wage increase for Unit III was 3.07% (Er.Br. 8).

The

Employer argues that CPI increases for 2014 very likely will not
exceed the Employer’s final offer for that year.

In light of the

fact that we have good CPI data for the successor CBA’s first two
years, and the parties have agreed on wage increases for those two
years, I find that the cost of living data for the 2012 and 2013
years are not helpful in selecting the appropriate final wage offer
for the 2014 contract year.
The Union emphasizes that there is an issue that arose in the
current negotiating round between the instant parties that deserves
significant weight.

During mid-2013, the Union agreed to what it

has termed “significant insurance concessions.”

These changes,

effective July 1, 2013, specified that employees enrolled in the
Employer’s PPO plan would pay an additional 5% of their coinsurance (from 10% up to 15%) (UX 4).

Additionally, employees

enrolled in the HMO plan have been paying higher premiums since
July 1, 2013, with these dollar amounts being larger as the

Page 14 of 17

coverage increases from employee-only to employee plus two (Un.Br.
20).

The Union emphasizes that it made this early concession on

insurance without getting a quid pro quo in return.

The Union

notes that the parties explicitly recognized this insurance bargain
as a relevant concession to be considered by the Arbitrator when
resolving the wage issue.

They stipulated accordingly:

“The Union hereby accepts the Employer’s proposal on health
insurance for the purposes of allowing a uniform
implementation of health insurance policies for McHenry County
employees. The parties acknowledge that the Union has
proposed that status quo language be continued for the term of
the contract through the negotiations. In consideration for
the Union’s concession on this issue, the Parties mutually
agree to stipulate to the interest arbitrator that due weight
be given to this concession in the formulation of an award of
wages as provided in Section 14(h)(6) of the Illinois Public
Labor Relations Act. 5 ILCS 315/14” (Un.Br. 21).
On the other hand, the Employer notes that the health
insurance changes mentioned above are rather modest and, more
importantly, have been agreed to by every other County employee
group, union and non-union.

The Employer notes that its approach

to health insurance has helped to hold down insurance premium cost
increases (EX 4), a result that benefits the Employer and employees
alike.

The Employer also argues that the total wage and benefit

package enjoyed by unit members leads to a conclusion that the
Employer’s wage offer should be selected.
As noted above, I have determined that many of the Section
14(h) decision factors were not helpful in deciding which final
offer should be selected.
However, there is an additional dimension to this dispute that
needs to be considered, under either the stipulations of the
parties in the Section 14(h)(2) decision factor, or under the such

Page 15 of 17

other factors . . . in the Section 14(h)(8) decision factor, and
that is the Union’s mid-term agreement with the Employer’s proposed
insurance changes.

I find that this change constitutes a

meaningful Union concession during the instant round of bargaining.
The Union’s concession resulted in the parties’ stipulation above
that I give “due weight” to this action.

I note that the Union

agreed to this concession before the parties reached impasse.

The

parties agree that this insurance change allowed “a uniform
implementation of health insurance policies for McHenry County
employees” (Stipulation in Un.Br. 21).

I find that the Union’s

concession on the health insurance issue, plus the parties’
stipulation memorializing that concession, supports the selection
of the Union’s wage offer.
Finding.

After considering all of the Section 14(h) decision

factors, I find, for the reasons explained above, that the Union’s
final offer on wages more nearly complies with the applicable
Section 14(h) decision factors than does the Employer’s final offer
on wages.

Accordingly, I select the Union’s last offer of

settlement to resolve the wage issue.
I note that Union’s wage offer says nothing about how the
retroactive pay process will be handled.

As a result of the final

offer constraint in Section 14 on this economic issue, I must leave
the details of this retroactive payment process in the parties’
hands to be worked out and implemented.

If there are any problems

implementing the retroactive payment process, I am available to
assist the parties in resolving any such problems.

Page 16 of 17

Tentative Agreement and Status Quo Provisions
As noted above, the parties resolved several issues during
their negotiations (UX 4).

Consistent with widespread colloquial

terminology, they referred to these items as TA’d (tentatively
agreed to) issues.

The parties provided me with a copy of their

TA’d issues (UX 4), and these issues are incorporated by reference
in this Award.

In addition, the parties agreed that all the

provisions in the expiring CBA that were not changed at the
negotiating table and are not on the agenda in this arbitration
proceeding will carry forward unchanged into the successor CBA as
“status quo” items.

Accordingly, I hereby incorporate into this

Award all of these TA’d issues and status quo provisions by
reference.

Page 17 of 17

AWARD
Under the authority granted to me by Section 14(g) of the
Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, I find that the following
outcome more nearly complies with the applicable decision factors
prescribed in Section 14(h) of the Act.

Accordingly, I select and

award this outcome on the issue on the arbitral agenda:
1. Wages (Article XXV)
The Union’s offer is selected.

In addition, all of the parties’ TA’d issues and status quo
provisions are incorporated by reference into this Award.
It is so ordered.
Respectfully submitted,

Champaign, IL
March 20, 2014

Peter Feuille
Arbitrator
