MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
CITY OF BROCKTON (THE CITY)
AND
MASSACHUSETTS LABORERS' DISTRICT COUNCIL
ON BEHALF OF
BROCKTON BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION TRADES (THE UNION)
(JULY 1, 2019 - JUNE 30, 2022)

This Memorandum sets forth the material terms of a successor collective bargaining
agreement reached between the Union's and the City's negotiating teams, subject to ratification
by the Union membership of the Union, and funding by the Brockton City Council as required by
law. For purposes of further negotiations and/or impasse procedures, this Memorandum shall be
considered off-the-record until ratification and funding occur. Failing such ratification or funding,
both parties will be free to revert to their on-the-record positions.
The collective bargaining agreement (CBA), which expired on June 30, 2019, shall be
extended without change for a period of three years, through June 30, 2022. The parties agree to
integrate the amendments set forth herein with the existing CBA, as well as make non-substantive
modifications to the form of the agreement to correct any typographical, grammatical or formatting
errors. Upon bargaining unit ratification, joint execution of the Memorandum of Agreement, and
requisite City Council adopting action, the Union and the City agree to begin negotiations for a
successor Memorandum of Agreement to begin on July 1, 2022.
The following provisions represent the material changes to the parties' agreement for an
agreement through June 30, 2022.
1. Base Wages:

Effective July 1, 2021, base wages shall be increased for all unit members by two dollars
and fifty cents ($2.50) per hour. The parties agree that there shall be no retroactive base wage
increase for FY2020 and FY2021.

The existing wage scales shall be amended and listed in Appendix "A" to reflect the $2.50
per hour base wage increase.
Quoted salary amounts in Appendix "A" are subject to verification of mathematical
calculations by the Auditor's Office.

2. COVID-19 Bonus
In recognition of the work performed by the membership during the Covid-19 pandemic,
the City will remit a one-time payment to each current member of the bargaining unit in the amount
of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.

3. Qualifications and Licenses
Effective March 1, 2022, Article XX: Qualifications and Licenses, Licensure Pay Increase,
shall be amended as follows:

Strike
... "up to three (3) licenses"

Replace with
... "up to five (5) licenses"

4. Janus v. AFSCME:
To comply with Janus v. AFSCME, the parties agree to strike Article II in its entirety and
replace the Article with the following:

ARTICLE II UNION DUES
No employee shall be required, as a condition of employment, to join
the Union; however, any employee who elects to join the Union shall
sign and submit to the City the authorization of dues forms.
Any employee may elect to pay an Agency Fee, equal to the dues
amount, to the Union by executing an Agency Fee authorization form,
expressly authorizing the City to deduct the Agency Fee.
Upon receipt of an authorization of dues/agency form, the Employer
agrees to deduct, each week, union membership dues or agency fees
levied in accordance with the Constitution of the Union from the pay of
each employee in the unit who executes or has executed said form.

2

No such deductions shall be made without an authorization dues/agency
form. Deductions may be made for all bargaining unit employees who
have executed said form, regardless of their probationary status.
The Union shall be responsible for providing a welcome packet to all
new employees who are members of the bargaining unit, with the forms
required herein.
In consideration of the employer's entering into this collective
bargaining Agreement, which Agreement includes union dues and
agency service fee provisions, the Union hereby agrees to indemnify the
said employer and hold it harmless from any and all claims, liabilities
or costs of the employer which arise out of entering into or enforcement
of said provision or which arise out of the payroll deduction of the union
dues and agency service fees.
There shall be no discrimination by Department Heads/Supervisors or
other agents of the Employer against any employee because of their
activity or membership in the Union (pursuant to M.G.L. c. 150E s.10).
There shall be no discrimination by union members against any
employee because of his/her refusal to join the Union or pay an Agency
Fee. The Employer further agrees that there will be no discrimination
against any member for his/her adherence to any provision of this
Agreement.
5. Housekeeping:
a.

Removal of City Policy from CBA:

The parties agree to remove the Code of Ethics Policy (the "policy") attached to the CBA
and to delete any and all references to the policy from the CBA. Specifically, the parties agree to
amend the CBA as follows:

Delete

Subsection 1 (Ethics Policy) from Article XXXV Miscellaneous Provisions

Remove

Code of Ethics
b. Health Insurance:

The parties agree to amend the CBA to remove language relative to health insurance
benefits, including, but not limited to, health insurance plans, plan designs, contribution rates, or
policies between the City, as the City has accepted M.G.L. c. 32B, §19, and such provisions have
been deemed superseded by the Public Employee Committee (PEC) Agreement. Specifically, the
parties agree to amend the Collective Bargaining Agreement as follows:

Amend

Title of Article XXIV from Group Insurance to Life Insurance Coverage

3

Delete

Article XXIV in its entirety
with the exception of Life Insurance in the amount of $5,000.00

Delete

Article XXXI Flexible Spending Account (FSA) in its entirety

Delete

Subsection 2 (Master Medical Premium Increase) and
Subsection 3 (Elimination of Medicare Part B Reimbursement) from
Article XXXV Miscellaneous Provisions

Remove

Attachment A: Increase In Employee Contribution to
Master Medical Health Insurance
Attachment B: Medicare Part B 75% Reimbursement

·/h
Dated this /~ay of February, 2022.

MA LABORERS' DISTRICT COUNCIL,
LOCAL 1162,

CITY OF BROCKTON,
By Its Mayor,

RO~--~--

ED AS TO FORM:

4
