Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 1 of 8

The regular business meeting of the Northampton Township Board of Supervisors was called to
order at 7:38 p.m.
Members of the Board present were:
Barry Moore
Larry Weinstein
Dr. Kimberly Rose
Members of the Board absent were:
George F. Komelasky
Eileen Silver
Others present were:
Robert M. Pellegrino, Township Manager
Dave Connell, Township Engineer
Mary Stover, CKS Engineers
Joseph Pizzo, Township Solicitor
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Chairman Weinstein led the Pledge of Allegiance and held a moment of silence in support of
military and emergency services personnel.
Chairman Weinstein explained that the Noise and ATV Ordinance will be heard at a special
meeting on June 28, 2016 at 7:30 p.m. because all parties involved need more information and
an opportunity to discuss the ordinance.
He added that another special meeting will be held in September to discuss the Rails to Trails
project. The Bucks County Planning Commission will be delivering a presentation and answering
questions related to the project.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Frank O’Donnell, 15 Feather Court, spoke on the flag code, etiquette, and guidelines relating to
concerns that have been voiced over the size of the flag at Municipal Park. He stated that, on
behalf of the Veterans Advisory Commission and as an American Legion member, the flag
meets the requirements due to the structure issue of the cell tower and the Commission is in
support of leaving the flag at its current size.
Susan Murphy, 26 Merry Dell Drive, disagreed with Mr. O’Donnell, stating that if the correct,
larger flag cannot be properly flown, then the solution should be to remove the flag entirely.

Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 2 of 8

She suggested that the owners of the cell tower be required to purchase a flagpole and have it
installed at the entrance to the park so the proper flag size to pole ratio is met. She also noted
that Tom Haney, the Commander of the VFW in Warminster, supports her request.
James Rothenburg, 6 Brianna Road, questioned if Rock Road and Holland Road are on the
schedule for resurfacing. Mr. Pellegrino stated this area is not on the schedule for this year.
Mr. Rothenburg asked if the Township receives documents for submission in the Planning and
Zoning Department electronically. Mr. Pellegrino explained building permits are received in
paper form but once approved are scanned in for electronic storage.
Mr. Rothenburg spoke on the Pennsylvania State Legislature relating to liquor licenses, health
care and the additional burden of the Cadillac Tax and raised concerns over power outages and
the effects on traffic lights. Mr. Pellegrino and Chairman Weinstein responded to the questions.
Natalie O’Donnell, 65 Danby Way, spoke on behalf of the Clean Air and Water Council. She
explained that Elcon Recycling is applying for a Phase II permit to build a hazardous toxic
chemical waste processing facility in the Keystone Industrial Port Complex in Falls Township,
located at 100 Dean Sievers Place (formerly US Steel). The river should not be the location for
any additional hazardous waste sites. She added that the site is dangerous to the environment
and to people’s health, and she encourages Board of Supervisors to pass a resolution against
Elcon Recycling from coming into Falls Township and urged residents to contact their local
representatives.
CONSENT ITEMS
Chairman Weinstein presented the May 25, 2016 minutes.
approved by unanimous consent.

The minutes were deemed

ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
Dr. Rose presented the accounts payable for June 8, 2016 in the amount of $1,127,258.26, and
the June 22, 2016 list in the amount of $1,138,676.92.
The Accounts Payable were deemed approved by unanimous consent.
NEW BUSINESS
Authorization to Sell Surplus Equipment
Dr. Rose stated the Public Works Department is recommending to sell vehicles and/or
equipment expected to be valued at more than $1,000. The vehicles/equipment can only be

Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 3 of 8

sold in accordance with the Second Class Township Code when authorized by the Board of
Supervisors.
The following is a list of surplus vehicles requesting to be sold by Mr. Crossland the Public
Works Director:
•
•
•

(2) 2009 Ford Crown Victoria
(1) 2011 Ford Crown Victoria
(1) 2011 Ford Expedition

A motion was made and seconded (Rose-Weinstein) to authorize the Administration to sell
surplus equipment at public auction as recommended by the Department of Public Works in a
memorandum dated June 14, 2016.
Motion Passed 3-0.
Consider Appointments to the Veterans Advisory Commission to Fill Two (2) Unexpired Terms
Chairman Weinstein tabled the Veterans Advisory Commission appointments in order to
interview additional applicants.
Ratify New Police Collective Bargaining Agreement
Chairman Weinstein explained the Administration and the Township’s Police Benevolent
Association (PBA) are currently working on a draft of a consolidated police contract
incorporating the terms and conditions of the recent negotiation and settlement terms. As part
of this process to finalize the agreement, the Board of Supervisors must ratify the new terms
and conditions.
Chairman Weinstein outlined the proposed changes to the existing contract. The proposed
contract is five (5) years and provides for wage increases, changes in the healthcare plan, oncall pay for detectives, a change in the work schedule from a 9-hour work shift to a 12-hour
work shift, an increase in the annual clothing allowance, an agreement to discuss pension
language, and the consolidation of steps in the wage scale of detectives, corporals, and
sergeants.
The proposed changes to the healthcare plan will save the Township approximately an
estimated $1.3 million over the five-year term. The annual average percentage cost of the
proposed contract is 4.34%.
A motion was made and seconded (Weinstein-Rose) to ratify the terms and conditions of a new
Collective Bargaining Agreement between Northampton Township and the Northampton
Township Police Benevolent Association as outlined in the Memorandum of Agreement dated
April 28, 2016.

Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 4 of 8

Chairman Weinstein called for Board comment.
Dr. Rose thanked Mr. Pellegrino and the staff for a great job in negotiations and stated she is
happy that there will be no arbitration. She added that our police officers are excellent and
perform their jobs with professionalism.
Mr. Moore stated his appreciation for the representatives from the Police Department that
were part of the negotiations. He noted that the possible impending Cadillac tax will have a
huge impact on the Township and is glad the Township had the foresight to put a clause in the
contract. The Cadillac Tax has been postponed from being implemented until at least 2020.
Mr. Pellegrino stated that both sides were able to reach a fair agreement after more than 20
meetings.
Motion Passed 3-0.
Dr. Rose also stated that Mrs. Silver and Mr. Komelasky each reviewed the contract and were in
agreement with the rest of the Board.
Consider a Resolution Authorizing a Grant Application to the Commonwealth Financing
Authority for Civic Center Improvements
Mr. Moore explained the Commonwealth Financing Authority is offering a grant program which
funds park development and rehabilitation. The Administration is recommending that the
Township submit a grant application for the upcoming grant round with the deadline for
submission of June 30, 2016. If secured, the grant would be used to fund the Phase 2
improvements to the Recreation Complex and Civic Center. He noted the Township recently
submitted a grant application to the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources for the
same project.
The Township must provide a 15% match up to a maximum grant award of $250,000. The cost
for the items earmarked for the grant; i.e. interior park trails, paving of bleacher pads to comply
with ADA requirements, construction of a new basketball court with lights, paving of interior
park roads and parking lots, is estimated at $633,000.
A motion was made and seconded (Moore-Rose) to approve Resolution R-16-14 authorizing the
Administration to submit an application to the Commonwealth Financing Authority for a grant
to fund improvements at the Recreation and Civic Center Complex.
Chairman Weinstein called for Board comment.
Dr. Rose stated applying for grants improves our Township and recreation for our youth.
Motion Passed 3-0.

Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 5 of 8

Consider Resolution Authorizing Execution of a Grant Agreement for the PennDot Green Light
Go Program for Traffic Signal Improvements at Hatboro and Almshouse Roads
Chairman Weinstein stated the Township was fortunate to be awarded a $20,880 grant from
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation’s (PennDOT) Green Light Go Program be used
for traffic signal improvements. The grant requires a 50% match. The Township typically
budgets funds each year for traffic signal maintenance and improvements and the grant will
allow the Township to perform additional work that was not budgeted. The funds will be used
to replace signal loops at Hatboro and Almshouse Roads with cameras and to install a battery
backup system.
A motion was made and seconded (Weinstein-Rose) to adopt Resolution R-16-15 authorizing
the Township Manager to execute a PennDOT Green Light Go Program Grant Agreement on
behalf of Northampton Township for traffic signal improvements at Hatboro and Almshouse
Road.
Chairman Weinstein called for Board comment.
Dr. Rose stated this is a perfect traffic location and light to work on with this grant money.
Motion Passed 3-0.
LIAISON REPORTS
Dr. Rose made the following announcements:
•

The James E. Kinney Senior Center has won the “Challenge of the Senior Centers” for
five (5) years in a row since its inception in 2012.

•

Join the Senior Center today for a yearly $20 fee and enjoy trips, activities, for a reduced
rate

•

A groundbreaking took place at Holland Middle and Newtown Middle Schools on June 1,
2016 .

•

The Council Rock Board of School Directors approved the 2016-2017 Budget. It includes
more than 5 million in budgetary reductions but increases taxes by 2.4 percent. Also, to
schools will be closed on primary election day. This change would move the last day of
school to June 15, 2017 and includes five (5) built in snow days.

•

Council Rock North had 433 graduates and Council Rock South had 549. Statistics show
92% of the Council Rock senior classes will be heading to college, 2% to the military and
6% are entering the workforce .

Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 6 of 8

•

On June 1, 2016 82 second graders from Hillcrest Elementary visited the Township to
learn and participate in how local government works. It was a great time enjoyed by the
adults as well as the kids.

•

The Southwestern Bucks Solid Waste Committee (SWBSWC), consisting of Northampton
Township, Upper Southampton, and Lower Southampton, met on June 13 and decided
to extend the trash contract for an additional year under the contract option. The yard
waste contract is set to expire on March 31, 2017.

Mr. Moore made the following announcements:
•

The Library will be having Dave DeLuca presented the Star Spangled Notebook on July 9,
at 2 p.m. and Civics for Adults on July 21, at 7 p.m.

•

The Library Board has hired an outside agency to help raise funds to support Library
programs and services. The Library has received over $7,500 in donations to date.

•

The Library is seeking volunteers and will be opening throughout the week now at 10
a.m. based on survey data. Also, the Library will be adding hours on Sundays beginning
in September.

•

Work is underway at the Civic Center to remove existing poles to proceed with the
widening the Newtown-Richboro Road

•

The Parks and Recreation Department is gearing up for summer with new and exciting
programs, and the Concert in the Park Series is back for another year.

•

Discount Tickets for various activities are available from the Parks and Recreation
Department.

•

The swim club located at the Northampton Country Club is still accepting membership
for the summer; go online to www.northamptonrec.com to see pricing.

Chairman Weinstein made the following announcements:
•

The Planning Commission is scheduled to meet on July 12, 2016 at 7:30 p.m.

•

The Davis Pontiac Site and the Holland Middle School projects are underway and moving
along nicely.

•

The Zoning Hearing Board met on June 13 to discuss variances needed for
impervious surface on a pool installation and a fence. No action is required on
these items by the Board of Supervisors. On June 27 the Zoning Hearing Board

Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 7 of 8

will consider variances requested for Lakeside Day Camp. The next meeting will
be July 11, 2016 at 7 p.m.
•

The Historical Commission had a meeting on June 16 and a recent Open House at the
Baust residence, He thanked the Public Works Department for keeping the Feaster-Van
Horn Cemetery in good condition.

•

The Veterans Advisory Commission hosted a Memorial Day Ceremony on May 30 and a
Flag Day Ceremony on June 14.

•

The Greater Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce is holding a Veteran Business Owner
networking event on June 30 from 8:30 a.m. until 11:30 a.m.

•

The Northampton Township Police Department sponsored a 5K run to raise money for
the Hero’s Scholarship fund.

•

A tree dedication was held at the Civic Center in memory of Ryan Lescher. ViceChairman Moore spoke at the event.

•

Extended well wishes to Dave Connell on his retirement

MANAGER’S REPORT
Mr. Pellegrino spoke on working with Dave Connell and how Dave is the “best of the best” and
it was an honor to have worked with him.
SOLICITOR’S REPORT
Mr. Pizzo reviewed a situation regarding the public speaking at meetings and email
communication. He explained a person speaking at a public meeting realizes the meeting is
being recorded and therefore understands their information is public knowledge. Emails are
subject to pubic dissemination and review. An unattended consequence occurred in connection
with the Rails to Trails project whereas the Township received an open records request for all
emails relating to the Rails to Trails project. The request included several hundred emails with
names and addresses, and under Pennsylvania Law these emails cannot be redacted. He added
he felt it was necessary to explain the process in case those who requested the records contacts
any of the residents.
Mr. Pizzo provided an update on the Mill Race Inn and explained the Redevelopment Authority
determined the property to be blighted and that the Township acquired a condemnation of the
property. The property owners brought this matter to Common Pleas Court. The Common
Pleas Court decided the Township and the Redevelopment Authority acted appropriately. The

Minutes of Board of Supervisors
June 22, 2016
Page 8 of 8

owners appealed to the Commonwealth Court and upheld the decision of the Common Pleas
Court. At this time, the Redevelopment Authority and the Township will be moving forward
He announced the Board met in an Executive Session for approximately 30 minutes to discuss
the Police Contract. No official action was taken by the Board.
He also echoed everyone’s comments on Dave’s retirement.
ENGINEER’S REPORT
Mr. Connell thanked everyone for their kind comments and for taking a chance on him 30 years
ago.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Joanne Klempner, 36 Harriet Drive, thanked the Board for moving forward to set up a date to
discuss the Rails to Trails project. Mrs. Klempner asked who the person was that requested the
right to know information. Mr. Pellegrino responded with the name and address of the
requestor.
Jeff Gold, 57 Grant Drive, raised his objection to Rails to Trails project, citing cost, policing,
specialized training, extra crossing guards, and the need for restrooms along the trail.
Joe Johnson, 41 Grant Avenue, stated his strong opposition to the Rails to Trails project and
echoed the same objections as previous speakers.
Ann VanEerden, 84 Bustleton Pike, thanked the Board for setting up a meeting with the Bucks
Planning Commission and giving the residents a chance to speak in an open forum on the Rails
to Trails project. She thanked Mr. Pizzo for his explanation on the Right to Know request.
Aaron Goldfinger, 5 Penn Circle, questioned how the meeting was established with the Planning
Commission. Chairman Weinstein explained how discussions took place.
The meeting adjourned at 9:30 p.m.
Respectfully Submitted,
______________________
Eileen Silver, Secretary
