December 11, 2023
POTTSTOWN BOROUGH COUNCIL
ANNOUNCEMENT
Borough Manager Keller explained the format for this evening’s meeting, advising that the meeting
is a GoTo Virtual Meeting and an in-person meeting. All persons wishing to speak during Public
Comment, whether participating by GoToMeeting or telephone, must submit their name and
address through chat or email at administration@pottstown.org. Requests to speak will be accepted
until 7:05p.m., at which time chat will be closed, and no further requests for comment will be
honored. As always, Public Comment will be limited to three minutes per person.
CALL TO ORDER
The regular meeting of the Pottstown Borough Council was called to order on Monday, December
11, 2023 at 7:00 p.m. as a hybrid, in-person and Go-To Meeting, with President Weand in the Chair.
INVOCATION
President Weand requested a moment of silence.
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
ROLL CALL
Councilors present were Ryan Procsal, Lisa Vanni, Donald Lebedynsky, Dan Weand and Andrew
Monastra. Also present were Mayor Stephanie Henrick, Manager Justin Keller, Assistant Manager
Zach Nelson, Solicitor Charles Garner (virtual) and Borough Secretary Virginia Takach. Councilor
Trenita Lindsay was absent.
APPROVAL OF MINUTES
Motion by Councilor Vanni, seconded by Councilor Monastra to approve the minutes of November
13, 2023 as presented. Motion carried: 6 ayes.
SUBCOMITTEE REPORTS
a. Finance & Administration – President Weand reported that the General Fund revenues. at
83% of the fiscal year, are at 101% and expenses at 82%. Real Estate taxes collected are at 99% and
local taxes at 98%. He added that assessment changes year-to-date are $17,072,490 and property
transfers continue to be addressed with the School District. There were no new Lerta applications.
President Weand also advised that the committee is reviewing additional information from
organizations that the Borough supports. He also noted that the North End Fire Company and the
Philadelphia Steam Fire Company have reported a profit. President Weand advised that the Library
is operating at a loss, with the only local municipality not funding the Library is Upper Pottsgrove
Township.
b. Safety – Mayor Henrick reported an uptake on vehicle break-ins, possibly due to the tik tok

December 11, 2023
challenge. The cars are specifically Kia’s and Hyundai’s. The Police Department is adding extra
patrols and there have been 6 arrests to date. The Department is also issuing clubs as safety locks.
c. Economic Development & Business Liaison – Ms. Lee-Clark provided a video history of the
former Plating Works, now known as DJ Pallets. She reviewed the progress of the building over the
last ten years. The building was environmentally contaminated and with the assistance of the
Borough and the School District with $102,000 in revenue, owner John Johns remediated the
building to a successful property and business entity.
Ms. Lee Clark also presented a video with the December 2nd and 3rd Holiday events throughout
town, including Santa’s arrival and the Tree Lighting in Smith Family Plaza and thanked all
involved with the celebration including Danette Wilson for her efforts. She also announced the Step
Challenge winners John Richter and Emery Manns, each receiving $50 gift cards.
Ms. Lee Clark also noted several new businesses opening in town and urged all to use the Yiftee
online gift cards and to shop small all year. She commented that there were a few parking
complaints that will be addressed next year.
COMMITTEE REPORTS
a. Land Bank – Ms. Lee-Clark advised that the Land Banks has acquired its 7th property,
403 Walnut Street and will be advertised in January 2024.
b. EAC – Mr. Derr welcomed Assistant Manager Nelson and thanked him for attending the
recent meeting. He reviewed ongoing issues such as renewable energy, sustainable energy and
carbon neutral efforts for Pottstown. He advised that members were invited to a clean energy event
by the Community Action for Clean Energy for the Philadelphia region.
c. Regional Planning – Councilor Procsal noted that the committee discussed projects for
the new year.
d. Blighted Property Review Committee – Councilor Procsal reported there was no meeting.
COMMENTS FROM CITIZENS PRESENT
a. Chris Brickhouse, 103 Jay Avenue, Phoenixville – commented that all but one Councilor
voted to appeal a case using taxpayer dollars to allow the Borough to arrest people. He urged
Council members to meet with the homeless individuals. He addressed Councilor Monastra
specifically for his disrespectful comments on his Facebook page. Mr. Brickhouse noted that he
receives no salary and works with the homeless on his own free time. He noted that Pottstown has
not resolved this problem in 40 years and should look to Phoenixville for a resolution.
b. Leanne Moyer 43 Sugar Maple Road, Barto – stated that she owns Leanne’s Life Saving
Fairy Group and started the organization due to losing her best friend to the streets of Pottstown.
She also commented on Councilor Monastra’s Facebook posts and asked Council for a solution.

December 11, 2023
c. Mike Hays, 330 West 3rd Street, Bridgeport – noted that across Pennsylvania there is
currently a shortage of 267,000 rental units. He added that a solution is to look at zoning roadblocks
and use of tiny homes. This would result in a decrease of evictions and people living on the street.
He added that outdated parking requirements deter affordable housing unit projects.
d. Robert Haines, 1101 North Franklin Street – noted his frustration and anger against Tom
Niarhos, the Beacon of Hope, St. Paul’s Church, the Council and the Pottstown Mayor for allowing
the illegal homeless shelter. He expressed his anger that Tom Niarhos has not been charged for
having a deadly weapon in his home and allowed his son to access the weapon used to kill an
individual. He also submitted a letter from his wife, Kathryn Haines, who could not be present, with
similar comments addressed to Council.
e. Doug Slick, 474 North Evans Street – commended all involved for having the downtown
and Borough Hall looking great and festive. He also submitted a petition to Council with 300
signatures from the Tri-County Area in support of the unhoused individuals living on streets and in
parks.
NEW BUSINESS
a.
2024 Budget - Motion by Councilor Lebedynsky, seconded by Councilor Vanni to
approve the 2024 Budget with total revenues of $66,443,935 and total expenditures of $66,443,935
as outlined in the 2024 Proposed Budget. Motion carried: 6 ayes.
b.
2024 Tax Rate – Motion by Councilor Procsal, seconded by Councilor Lebedynsky
to adopt an Ordinance to fix the Borough tax rate for real property for the Year 2024 as follows:
Tax Rate for General purposes, the sum of
10.661 mills
For Street Light purposes, the sum of
.337 mills
For Parks and Recreation purposes, the sum of
1.215 mills
For Library purposes, the sum of
.278mills
For Fire Protection purposes, the sum of
2.031 mills
For Debt purposes, the sum of
.087 mills
TOTAL
14.609 mills
ORDINANCE NO. 2229
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF POTTSTOWN MONTGOMERY COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA, FIXING THE TAX RATE FOR THE YEAR 2024
Motion carried: 6 ayes.
c.
Fee Resolution Amendment - Motion by Councilor Lebedynsky, seconded by
Councilor Procsal to adopt a Resolution to amend fees associated with Trash and Refuse Disposal
RESOLUTION NO. 2023-21
A RESOLUTION AMENDING THE FEE SCHEDULE OF THE BOROUGH OF POTTSTOWN
TO AMEND FEES ASSOCIATED WITH TRASH AND REFUSE DISPOSA

December 11, 2023
WHEREAS, the Burgess and Town Council of the Borough of Pottstown adopted a Comprehensive
Fee Resolution on July 10, 1995; and
WHEREAS, the Borough periodically reviews the Fee Schedule to determine if additions and/or
amendments to the Fee Schedule are necessary and proper; and
WHEREAS, based upon the recommendation of the Borough staff, the Borough of Pottstown
desires to revise the Comprehensive Fee Resolution.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT AND IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED by the Burgess and Town Council
of the Borough of Pottstown, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as follows:
SECTION 1. The following fees associated with trash service are hereby amended to read as
follows:
Annual Service Charge ($ 95.44 per quarter) for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish,
refuse and recycling for each residential unit. $381.76 per year
SECTION 2. All future modifications of these fees and other fees established by the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be made by Resolution, from time to time, duly adopted by the
Burgess and Town Council of the Borough of Pottstown.
SECTION 3. This Resolution shall become effective immediately upon enactment, although the
fees shall become effective January 1, 2024.
ENACTED and RESOLVED this 11th day of December, 2023.
Motion carried: 6 ayes.
d. AFSCME CBA - Motion by Councilor Lebedynsky, seconded by Councilor Vanni to
approve and authorize execution of a Collective Bargaining Agreement between the Borough of
Pottstown and AFSCME for a three (3) year contract to expire December 31, 2026
Solicitor Garner confirmed that the AFSCME members have voted to ratify the proposed three-year
agreement to begin January 1, 2024.
Motion carried: 6 ayes.
e. 215 South Washington Street - Motion by Councilor Procsal, seconded by Councilor
Lebedynsky to grant the request of 215 South Washington Street, LLC, for a Waiver of the Land
Development Process for property located at 215 South Washington Street. Motion carried: 6 ayes.
f. Chestnut Street Park - Motion by Councilor Vanni, seconded by Councilor Lebedynsky to
award the bid for the Chestnut Street Park Improvements as per the bid tabulation of December 7,
2023, subject to review and approval of the Solicitor and the Parks & Recreation Director. Motion
carried: 6 ayes.
g. Second Baptist Church - Motion by Councilor Kirkland, seconded by Councilor Vanni to
grant the request of the Second Baptist Church for a Minor Land Development for the property
located at 507 & 541 North Adams Street subject to compliance with the following conditions:
i. Compliance with the Cedarville Engineering letter of November 15, 2023
ii. Payment in full of all Borough Review fees
iii. A favorable recommendation of the Pottstown Planning Commission at its
December meeting
Motion carried: 6 ayes.

December 11, 2023

h. Second Baptist Church - Motion by Councilor Kirkland, seconded by Councilor Lebedynsky
to grant the following waiver requests from the Subdivision & Land Development Ordinance for the
Second Baptist Church, 507 & 541 North Adams Street as referenced in the Schock Group LLC
letter of December 1, 2023:
i. Section 22-A402-1 – requirement to show features within 100 feet of site
ii. Section 22- A402.2 – requirement to show contour lines and elevation within 100
feet of site
iii. Section 22-A403.8 – requirement of right-of-way widths, cartway or pavement
widths, sidewalks and approximate grades
Motion carried: 6 ayes.
i. Bright Hope Playground - Motion by Councilor Vanni, seconded by Councilor Procsal to
grant the request of the Montgomery County Housing Authority for a Waiver of Financial Security
for the Bright Hope Community Playground Construction project. Motion carried: 6 ayes.
j. Police Chief’s Contract - Motion by Councilor Procsal, seconded by Councilor Vanni to
approve and authorize the execution of a Fifth Addendum to the Police Chief’s Contract. Motion
carried: 6 ayes.
k. Animal Control Officer Agreement - Motion by Councilor Lebedynsky, seconded by
Councilor Procsal to approve and authorize execution of a Third Amendment to the Animal Control
Officer Agreement, between the Borough of Pottstown and Daywalt’s Animal Control, LLC for an
exchange of a vehicle and compensation, in an amount not to exceed $11,000. Motion carried: 6
ayes.
l. Zoning - 101 East High Street – Motion by Councilor Vanni, seconded by Councilor
Lebedynsky to authorize the Solicitor to send a letter to the Zoning Hearing Board to suggest the
imposition of certain conditions on the zoning relief request of Monsef Bensaad for property located
at 101 East High Street
Solicitor Garner suggested conditions could include that the plan is established as a grocery store
with fresh foods, reasonable hours of a grocery store and limit any games of chance for skill games.
Motion carried: 6 ayes.
m. Zoning – 379 Cherry Street - Possible motion to authorize the Solicitor to send a letter of
support to the Zoning Hearing Board regarding the zoning relief request of AMA Paper Products
Company c/o Ibrahim Abdrabbo for property located at 379 Cherry Street
Councilor Procsal requested this be forwarded to the Zoning Hearing Board with no action from
Council.
n. Meeting Schedule – January 2024 - Motion by Councilor Kirkland, seconded by Councilor
Lebedynsky to approve and authorize advertisement of the 2024 Council Meeting Schedule for
January 2024, as presented

December 11, 2023

Mr. Keller advised that Council is required to meet on Tuesday, January 2nd and the regular date for
the Committee of the Whole meeting, would be January 3rd. He requested Council’s consideration
to combine the Reorganization Meeting and the Committee of the Whole meeting to be held on
January 2nd.
Motion carried: 6 ayes.
o. Meeting Schedule – 2024 - Motion by Councilor Procsal, seconded by Councilor
Lebedynsky to approve and authorize advertisement of the 2024 Council Meeting Schedule for
February 2024 to December 2024, as presented. Motion carried: 6 ayes.
REPORT OF BILLS - Motion by Councilor Lebedynsky, seconded by Councilor Procsal to pay
the outstanding bills in the amount of $1,677,113.31. Motion carried: 6 ayes.
ANNOUNCEMENTS
Councilor Procsal wished all Happy Holidays.
Councilor Kirkland with all Happy Holidays and wished prayers and support to the homeless.
Mayor Henrick spoke on behalf of Councilor Lindsay, noting the free Pottstown High School
concert on December 13th and the Scout Troop 146PNG installed a new sign in Riverfront Park.
President Weand also thanked all involved with the wonderful holiday events and wished all Happy
Holidays.
ADJOURNMENT
President Weand adjourned the meeting at 7:45p.m.
Submitted by,

Justin M. Keller
Borough Manager
