SCHEDULEC

C-l

SALARY, EXPENSE AND OTHER ALLOWANCES
These shall be governed by specific appropriation in the Annual Budget,
or at the discretion of the City Council upon the recommendation of the
Mayor.

C-2

ANNUAL VACATION LEAVE
July 1st of each year, employees will receive vacation leave as followed:
0-10 Years
10 years or more

10 days
15 days

Annual leave days are not cumulative if you do not use your leave by the end of the
fiscal year then you lose it.

C-3 PAID HOLIDAYS (14)
New Year's Eve
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King's Birthday (I-IS)
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
C-4

Thanksgiving Day &
day After Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve
Christmas Day
Employee's Birthday
One Floating Holiday may be
taken upon request with the
approval of the supervisor.

SICK LEAVE
Six (6) days of sick leave will be given to an employee every fiscal year.
(a)

The amount of sick leave used by an employee shall be equal to the number of
regularly scheduled hours he/she would otherwise have worked during his
absence on such leave. Should a change in the workweek occur, accumulated
sick leave shall be credited on the basis of the new work week schedule.
Accumulated sick leave credit shall be converted to hours that would have
been earned on the new work week schedule.

(b)

A certification of illness or jury from a physician olthe Mayor's choosing, at
the City's expense may be required by the Mayor as evidence of illness or
disability before compensation for the period of illness or disability is allowed,
and shall be mandatory if the illness or disability exceeds three (3) working
days. Abuse of the sick leave privilege or falsification of illness or disability
will result in disciplinary action up to and including discharge.

(c)

Sick leave will not be allowed when absence is due to the use of
narcotics or intoxicants, willful misconduct, or any illness or injury incurred
while self- employed or employed by other than the city.

(d)

Any employee who becomes ill and unable to report for work, must,
unless circumstances beyond the control of the employee prevent
such reporting, notify the supervisor on duty within one (1) hour after
the starting time of hislber particular shift on the first day of his/ her absence,
unless other reporting agreements are made between the employee and
his/her department head, and daily thereafter, if not hospitalized, or sick
leave pay will not be allowed.

(e)

If the employee so elects, after all accrued sick leave is used, vacation

leave may be used and payment made therefore to the extent of vacation leave
accrued to which employee is entitled as of such date.

(f)

When an employee receives his/her last check for sickness, he/she will
be placed on leave without pay for a period not exceed three (3) years
or hislber seniority, whichever is less. If, at the end of that time, employee is
still unable to return to work, hislber employment shall be terminated.
Employee shall be eligible for re-employment, provided he/she has completely
recovered, and has a doctor's statement to that effect subject to City physical
examination and approval, and provided further, that a position is available
in accordance with hislber seniority.

(g)

Any employee who hecomes ill and unable to report for work, must,
unless circumstances beyond the control of the employee prevent
such reporting, notify the supervisor on duty within one (1) hour after
the starting time of his/her particular shift on the first day of his/ her absence,
unless other reporting agreements are made between the employee and
hislber department head, and daily thereafter, if uot hospitalized, or sick
leave pay will not be allowed.

(h)

If the employee so elects, aftcr all accrued sick leave is used, vacation
leave may be used and payment made therefore to the extent of vacation leave
accrued to which employee is entitled as of such date.

(i)

When an employee receives his/her last check for sickness, he/she will
be placed on leave without pay for a period not exceed three (3) years
or hislber seniority, whichever is less. If, at the end ofthat time, employee is
still unable to return to work, hislber employment shall be terminated.
Employee shall be eligible for re-employment, provided he/she has completely
recovered, and has a doctor's statement to that effect subject to City physical
examination and approval, and provided further, that a position is available
in accordance with hislber seniority.

(j)

During any period an employee is off on a medical leave of absence, medical
and life insurance will continue in full force by the employer at the group rate
for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days.

(k)

Effective July 1, 1985, any schedule C employee of the City of Inkster
who voluntarily terminates employment and who has 15 years or more of
service with the City of Inkster may convert sick leave to vacation
leave at the rate of (5) sick days to one (1) vacation day (see council
Resolution #85-9-341).
Unused Sick will be accumulative.

C-5

PERSONAL LEAVE
Three (3) days per year - not related to sick leave use and not
cumulative. All use shall be with approval of the Mayor.

C-6

EMERGENCY AND FUNERAL LEAVE
In the case of serious illness in the immediate family, emergency leave
may be granted by the Mayor. Immediate family shall include
wife, husband, child, brother, sister, parent, parent-in-law and
grandparents.
In case of a death in the immediate family, upon approval from the
Mayor, leave may be granted. Immediate family is defined as
wife, husband, child, brother, sister, parent, parent-in-law,
grandparents, sister-in-law and brother-in-law.

If death occurs to other relatives of the employee and/or if there are
other emergencies not stated above, leave may be granted and
chargeable to accumulated sick leave.

Emergency and funeral leave together shall not exceed ten (10) days
per year.

C-7

C-8

DEFERRED COMPENSATION
All employees will be eligible to participate in a 457 Plan.
Vacation payout may be added to this plan.

INSURANCES (Hospital/Medieal, Sickness/Accident, Long Term,
Short-Term, Dental)
Terms, coverage and contributions shall be determined by the plan
currently in force for AFSCME employees.

C-9

LIFE INSURANCE-Based upon annual salary.
Term and coverage and contributions shall be determined by the
plan currently in force for AFSCME employees.

C-IO

SEVERANCE PAY (Subject to the approval of the Mayor)
If the employee's services are terminated involuntarily (for other
than retirement or unlawful conduct), the employee shall be paid
Severance pay as follows: For service ...

A. Up to two years:
B. Up to five years:
C. Up to ten years:
D. More than ten years:

Two weeks pay.
Four weeks pay.
Eight week pay.
Ten weeks pay.

C-ll

MATERNITY LEAVE
Terms and coverage shall be determined by the leave currently in
force for AFSCME employees.

C-12

PART-TIME EMPLOYEES (NOT TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES)
Part-time employees are not eligible to participate in the benefits
associated with full-time employment (i.e. health, optical, dental, etc.).
Part-time employees will be paid for holidays if the holiday falls on
their regularly scheduled day of work (pro-rated, if necessary).
After one year of service, part-time employees will be eligible for
vacation time, on a pro-rated basis. There will be no payout
for vacation time upon resignation, or termination.
The Mayor may approve funeral leave. Part-time employees
may participate in the Deferred Compensation Program.
The Mayor may approve Emergency Leave on a case by case
basis.

WNL:GC
Reviscd 11/2017
