09/30/2020
3117-02
20-MED-02-0109
39496

AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF MONROE
AND THE
OHIO PATROLMEN'S BENEVOLENT
ASSOCIATION
(Sergeants)

EFFECTIVE: June 1, 2020 to May 31, 2023

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE I

AGREEMENT AND PURPOSE ............................................................................ I

ARTICLE2

RECOGNITION, MEETINGS, BULLETIN BOARD ...........................................2

ARTICLE3

ASSOCIATES/UNION BUSINESS ......................................................................4

ARTICLE4

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ....................................................................................5

ARTICLES

NO STRIKES/NO LOCKOUT ...............................................................................7

ARTICLE6

PROBATIONARY PERIOD ..................................................................................8

ARTICLE 7

DUES DEDUCTION ..............................................................................................9

ARTICLES

NO DISCRIMINATION ...................................................................................... 10

ARTICLE9

DISCIPLINE ......................................................................................................... 11

ARTICLE IO

PERSONNEL FILES ............................................................................................ 15

ARTICLE 11

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ............................................................................... 17

ARTICLE 12

ARBITRATION ................................................................................................... 19

ARTICLE 13

MISCELLANEOUS .............................................................................................21

ARTICLE 14

WAGES ................................................................................................................23

ARTICLE 15

HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME ..............................................................25

ARTICLE 16

CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE ..............................................29

ARTICLE 17

HOLIDAYS ..........................................................................................................31

ARTICLE 18

VACATIONS .......................................................................................................32

ARTICLE 19

SICK LEAVE .......................................................................................................35

ARTICLE20

INJURY LEAVE ..................................................................................................39

ARTICLE 21

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE, MILITARY LEAVE, JURY LEAVE AND OTHER
LEAVE .................................................................................................................42

ARTICLE22

INSURANCE........................................................................................................44

ARTICLE23

SAFETY AND HEALTH .....................................................................................47

ARTICLE24

RESIDENCY ........................................................................................................49

ARTICLE25

DRUG FREE WORKPLACE ............................................................................... 50

ARTICLE26

MODIFICATION, SEPARABILITY AND CONFLICT OF LAWS .................. 51

ARTICLE27

OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT ................................................................................. 52

ARTICLE28

SENIORITY .........................................................................................................53

ARTICLE29

WAIVER IN CASE OF El\.1ERGENCY .............................................................. 55

ARTICLE30

DURATION OF AGREEI\.1ENT ..........................................................................56

11

ARTICLE 1
AGREEMENT AND PURPOSE
1.1

This Agreement is between the City of Monroe, Ohio, hereinafter referred to as the

"Employer" or "City," and the Ohio Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, hereinafter referred to
as the "Union" or "OPBA," a labor organization as defined in Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
1.2

This Agreement is made for the purpose of promoting cooperation and continuous

harmonious relations between the Employer, its Employees, and the Union.

1

ARTICLE2
RECOGNITION, MEETINGS, BULLETIN BOARD

2.1

Recognition.

The Employer recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive

representative for all full-time Employees in the bargaining unit as set forth in the certification
issued by the Ohio State Employment Relations Board as follows:
Included: All full-time police sergeants;
Excluded: Chief, all other Employees.
2.2

Meetings. In the interest of sound labor/management relations, once each quarter or as

mutually agreed, the Employer and/or designee(s) shall meet with not more than two members of
the bargaining unit, upon written request, for the purpose of:
a.

disseminating general information of interest to both parties

b.

giving the Union representatives the opportunity to share views of their members

and/or suggestions on the subjects of interest to their members;
c.

discussing ways to improve efficiency and safety and health issues within the

department;
d.

promoting harmonious relations between Employer and the Union in the best

interest of the community.
2.3

Bulletin Board. Bulletin board space will be provided within the Police Department

facility for use by the Union and members of the bargaining unit. The City may post notices on
the board of matters relating directly to police business and vacancies within the Police
Department. The Union may post on the board notices relating to recreational and social events
applicable to members of the bargaining unit; election or election results; general membership
meetings and other related business meetings; general Union business of interest to members of
the bargaining unit.
2

2.4

Union Activity. Employees shall be permitted, upon reasonable notice to the Chief or

designee, to conduct Union related activity during working hours so long as it does not
unreasonably interfere with departmental operations.

3

ARTICLEJ
ASSOCIATES/UNION BUSINESS

3.1

The Union is authorized to select one (1) associate and one (1) alternate to conduct

approved Union business for the bargaining unit. The associate/alternate upon giving reasonable
notice, and upon authorization from the Chief or his/her designee, may be allowed reasonable
time off without loss or gain in pay to investigate a grievance, consult with the Employer in
processing a grievance, or to assist in the settlement of disputes. Permission to investigate and/or
process a grievance or attend a disciplinary hearing during on duty time is at the sole discretion
of the Employer. In addition, the Director and or his or her alternate will each be permitted to
utilize sixteen (16) hours of paid leave, other than sick leave, annually, for the purpose of
attending union-related training and/or attending to other union business. Said union leave will
be granted upon reasonable notice to the Employer.

4

ARTICLE4
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

4.1 The Union recognizes that the City shall have the exclusive right to manage the operations,
control the premises, direct the work force and maintain efficiency of operations. Among the
City's management rights, but not by way of limitation, are the following:
(1)

To direct and evaluate the work of Employees;

(2)

To determine the mission of the department and the personnel, methods,
means, and procedures necessary to most efficiently fulfill that mission;

(3)

To determine the size and composition of the work force;

(4)

To suspend, discipline, reduce or discharge Employees for cause;

(5)

To lay off Employees or abolish positions;

(6)

To hire, schedule, promote, demote, transfer and assign Employees;

(7)

To recruit, select, and determine the qualifications and characteristics
desired in new hires;

(8)

To schedule or not schedule overtime as required in the manner most
advantageous to the requirements of efficient department operations;

(9)

To determine the locations, size and number of facilities;

(10)

To determine the quality standards and level of service required;

(11)

To schedule Employees and establish their hours and days of work;

(12)

To select the type, quantity and quality of equipment, tools and machinery
to be used in the methods of operating them and the responsibilities
therefore;

5

(13)

To establish and require conformance to, rules of conduct including
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP' s) and Standard Operating
Guidelines (SOG's);

(14)

To train or retrain Employees as management deems appropriate and to
require Employees to maintain certifications, including but not limited to
firearms certification;

(15)

To generally manage the Police Department's business as it deems best;

(16)

To establish, after consultation with the Union, and enforce a tardiness and
absenteeism policy permitting discipline, including termination, for any
violation thereof; and

(17)

To establish, after consultation with the Union, and enforce a Drug and
Alcohol Policy permitting discipline, including termination, for any
violation thereof.

4.2 It is agreed that the above listing of management rights shall not be deemed to exclude other
proper functions not specifically listed herein or traditionally exercised by the Employer.
4.3 The City agrees that, to the extent possible, work rules, standard operating procedures and
standard operating guidelines that are promulgated shall be reduced to writing with copies to the
Union and affected members in advance of their effective date.

6

ARTICLES
NO STRIKES/NO LOCKOUT

The OPBA and the members agree that there shall be no strikes. The term, "strike", shall
have the same definition for purposes of this Agreement as contained in 4117.0l(H) of the
O.R.C. and shall additionally include any effort to use sick leave, to be absent from work without
permission, or to abstain from performance of assigned duties if used for the purpose of
inducing, influencing or coercing a change in wages, hours, terms or other conditions of
employment. In the event that a member is engaged in a violation of this article, the OPBA
shall, upon request of the City, and concurrence of the OPBA that an unlawful strike is being
engaged in, immediately notify such member that the member is in violation of this Article and
direct the member to resume normal work activities. The City may also request the OPBA to
publicly denounce any violation of this Article.
The City agrees that it will not lock-out members covered by this Agreement during the
course of this Agreement. The term "lock-out" shall have the same definition, for the purpose of
this Agreement, as contained in Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised Code.

7

ARTICLE6
PROBATIONARY PERIOD

Each newly appointed Sergeant shall be required to successfully complete a one (1) year
probationary period.

The length of the probationary period shall be one (1) year.

The

calculation of the one (1) year period shall begin the first day for which the Employee receives
compensation as a Sergeant from the Employer.
A newly appointed Sergeant may be demoted, at any time during his probationary period,
and shall have no appeal rights through the grievance-arbitration procedure or through a Court of
Law.

8

ARTICLE7
DUES DEDUCTION

7.1 OPBA Dues Deductions. The City agrees to deduct from the wages of any employee who is
a member of the OPBA, all OPBA membership dues uniformly required. The OPBA will notify
the City from time to time of the dues it charges and its current membership. All members of the
Bargaining Unit shall either become dues paying members of the OPBA or, as a condition of
continued employment, remit to the OPBA a fair share fee in an amount set from time to time by
the OPBA in accordance with the provisions of O.R.C. § 4117 .09(C). Said amount shall be
deducted from all wages of all such non-members on the same basis as the deductions made for
dues from members of the OPBA. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
employee to become a member of the OPBA. The OPBA agrees to save the City harmless in the
event of any legal controversy with regard to the application of this provision. All dues and fairshare fees collected shall be paid over by the Employer once each month to the OPBA.
7.2 Other Deductions. The City further agrees to deduct from the pay of those employees
authorizing such deduction, and turn over to the appropriate party, monies designated for the
purposes such as credit union, savings bonds, United Appeal, and similar causes in accordance
with the City's current policy on payroll deductions. These deductions shall be subject to the
City's ability to maintain an efficient payroll procedure.
7.3 Direct Deposit. The City shall provide direct deposit and Employees' pay checks shall be
directly deposited effective thirty (30) days after the execution of this Agreement.

9

ARTICLES
NO DISCRIMINATION

Neither the Employer nor the Union shall discriminate against or in favor of any
Employee on account of race, color, religion, creed, national origin, sex or handicap. Words
used in this Agreement in the masculine gender will be read and construed in the feminine
gender as well, unless otherwise indicated.
There shall be no discrimination by the Employer or the Union against any Employee on
the basis of such Employee's membership or non-membership in the Union.

ARTICLE9
DISCIPLINE

9.1

The parties recognize that discipline is essential to the operation of the City and agree

that fair discipline is necessary for the public interest and the morale and welfare of the
Employees.

The object of these provisions is to assure that the relevant facts are fairly

developed so that an informed decision can be made by the Employer regarding whether and the
extent to which discipline shall be imposed.
9.2

No bargaining unit member shall be disciplined except for just cause. Just cause shall

include, but not be limited to: dishonesty, bribery, misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance,
misconduct in office, neglect of duty, immoral conduct, habitual drunkenness, illegal use of
controlled substances, incompetence, insubordination, refusal to obey orders given by proper
authority, discourteous treatment of the public and violation of divisional standards of conduct
on and off duty.
9.3

Forms of disciplinary action shall be:
a. Documented Verbal Reprimand
b. Written Reprimand
c. Suspension without pay
d. Reduction in Pay/Position
e. Discharge
Discipline shall be applied progressively, but it is understood that some serious violations

may warrant suspension without pay or immediate discharge. In following the principle of "the
punishment should fit the crime," the Employer will take into consideration the nature of

11

violation, the Employee's record of discipline and the Employee's record of performance and
conduct.
a. A pre-disciplinary conference with the Chief of Police or his designee holding the rank of
Lieutenant or higher will be conducted prior to the issuance of a reprimand. The Chief or
Officer who conducts the hearing will make a determination of discipline and either
dismiss the discipline without record, or issue the reprimand.

b. If the Employee does not agree to the reprimand determination issued by an Officer other
than the Chief of Police, they may appeal to Step 2 of the grievance procedure outlined in
Article 11.

c. If the Employee does not agree to the reprimand determination issued by the Chief of
Police, they may appeal to Step 3 of the grievance procedure outlined in Article 11.
Documented verbal reprimands and written reprimands will not be subject to Step 4
(Arbitration) of the grievance procedure outlined in Article 11.
9.4

When the Employer (through its management agents) believes that an Employee is guilty

of an act or omission for which disciplinary action above a written reprimand is warranted, the
following steps shall apply:
a.

The Employee will be promptly notified that he or she is accused of conduct for

which discipline is contemplated and the Employee shall be advised of the nature of the alleged
conduct and the nature of the evidence against him or her, the time and place of a conference
with the Chief of Police, and his or her right to bring with him or her to the conference an OPBA
representative.

12

b.

At the conference with the Chief of Police, the charges will be stated to the

Employee and the Employee shall have an opportunity to offer his explanation, defense, or
mitigating circumstances.
c.

At the conclusion of the conference, the Chief of Police shall do one of the

following:
(1)

Dismiss the allegations as unfounded without record; or

(2)

Provide a written determination, including a specification of charges, upon
the imposition of appropriate discipline of record.

d.

If the employee does not accept the Chiefs recommendation, he or she may

grieve the determination to Step 3 of Article 11. Any agreement reached between the OPBA, the
Employee, and the Employer at this stage shall be final and binding on the OPBA, the Employee,
and the Employer and shall not be subject to further appeal.
e.

If no agreement is reached, the Employee shall then have the right to submit the

matter to arbitration in accordance with Step Four of the Grievance Procedure.
f.

An Employee under investigation for commission of misconduct which would

constitute a crime with respect to which "Miranda" warnings are required to be given, shall be
advised, prior to questioning, of his "Miranda" rights. An Employee who is under investigation
for misconduct which would not constitute criminal conduct subject to "Miranda" rights will be
informed, prior to questioning, that he is the subject of an investigation, the nature of the
suspected misconduct, and his right to have representation of his choice present during the
questioning. The Employee, upon request, may obtain postponement of the questioning for a
reasonable period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours in order to arrange for representation to
be present for the questioning if the Employee so desires.

13

Failure by an Employee to completely respond to a relevant question, after being
informed of his Garrity rights and being ordered to do so, may be deemed refusal and may result
in disciplinary action.
g.

Interrogation, questioning, or interviewing of a bargaining unit member accused

of misconduct shall be narrowly tailored in scope to the misconduct specifically alleged. In
addition, interview sessions will be of reasonable length and shall accommodate personal
necessities. Interviews shall be conducted during the Employee's working hours unless mutually
agreed by the parties. Any tape recorded interviews will be copied and made available to the
other party upon request.
h.

These disciplinary procedures and the grievance and arbitration procedures of this

Agreement are in lieu of the civil service laws and regulations under Chapter 124 of the O.R.C.
and the City Charter pursuant to the provision of R.C. Section 4117 .1 0(A).
i.

As an alternative or in addition to the above, in the event of a serious incident, an

internal investigation may be conducted by an investigative team chaired by the Chief of Police.
J.

No Employee will be compelled to take a polygraph examination and/or a CVSA.

14

ARTICLE 10
PERSONNEL FILES

10.1

Records of Disciplinary Actions:
a.

Unfounded or unsubstantiated complaints against an Employee will not be placed

in the Employee's personnel file.
b.

Verbal Counselings and records of verbal counselings are not considered

disciplinary actions, and will contain a statement to that effect.
c.

Written reprimands, records of verbal reprimands and counselings, and all other

Employer actions are permanent records.
d.

An Employee's official personnel file shall be kept in the office of the City

Manager and shall consist of all records from the Employee's initial date of employment with the
Police Department.
e.

For the sole purposes of discipline, grievance and arbitration procedures:
(1)

Written reprimands and records of verbal reprimands and counselings will
have no force and effect eighteen ( 18) months after the record was entered
into the Employee's file, provided no other disciplinary actions, including
written reprimands and records of verbal reprimands and counseling, have
occurred during this eighteen (18) month period.

(2)

Suspensions without pay of five (5) days or less will have no force and
effect thirty-six (36) months after the record was entered into the
Employee's file, provided no other suspensions without pay or demotions
have occurred during this thirty-six (36) month period.

(3)

Suspensions without pay in excess of five (5) days will have no force and
effect seventy-two (72) months after the record was entered into the
15

Employee's personnel file, provided that no other suspensions or
demotions have occurred during this seventy-two (72) month period.
f.

Employees shall, upon request, be permitted access to his personnel files

pertaining to employment.
g.

Signatures on evaluations only reflect that the evaluation has been reviewed by

the Employee and does not represent that the Employee agrees with its contents. The Employee
shall receive a copy of the evaluation at the time of signing.

16

ARTICLE 11
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
11.1

A grievance shall be described as a dispute or complaint arising between the parties

hereto under or out of this Agreement or the interpretation, application, performance,
termination, or any breach thereof, and shall be processed and disposed of pursuant to the steps
set forth below, except that every grievance will start at the step above the step occupied by the
person in the organizational hierarchy that made the decision that triggered the grievance
procedure.

However, in no event will a grievance be initiated at Step 4 of the grievance

procedure.
a.

~:
Within a reasonable time, not to exceed 10 calendar days, excluding
weekends and holidays, following the date of occurrence, an Employee
having a grievance and/or his Union representatives shall put the
grievance in writing and take it to the Supervising Lieutenant.

The

Employer shall give its answer to the Employee and/or his Union
representative within 5 calendar days, excluding weekends and holidays,
after the presentation of the grievance in Step 1. Within this 15 calendar
day period, excluding weekends and holidays, the Employee is
encouraged to seek to resolve his grievance on an informal basis.

If the grievance is not settled in Step 1, the grievance may, within 10
calendar days, excluding weekends and holidays, after the answer in Step
1, be presented in Step 2 in writing to the Police Chief or his designee and
must contain a statement as to why the City's answer in Step 1 does not
17

resolve the grievance. At this time a Representative of the Union may be
in attendance at a meeting where, if both parties agree, witnesses and/or
evidence may be presented that relate to a resolution of the grievance. A
grievance so presented in Step 2 shall be answered by the Employer within
5 calendar days, excluding weekends and holidays, after its presentation.

If the grievance is not settled in Step 2, the grievance may, within 10
calendar days, excluding weekends and holidays, after the answer in Step
2, be presented in Step 3 in writing to the City Manager or his designee
and must be accompanied by a reason or reasons why the City's answer at
Step 2 does not resolve the grievance. At this time a Representative of the
Union may be in attendance at a meeting where, if both parties agree,
witnesses and/or evidence may be presented that relate to a resolution of
the grievance. A grievance so presented in Step 3 will be answered by the
Employer within 5 calendar days, excluding weekends and holidays, after
either its presentation to the City Manager or his designee, or the date of
the meeting, whichever is later.

A grievance which has not been resolved in steps 1 through 3 may be
referred to arbitration as set forth in the "Arbitration" Article of this
Agreement.
11.2

Any disposition of a grievance from which no appeal is taken by the aggrieved Employee

or the Union within the time limits specified herein shall be deemed resolved and shall not
thereafter be considered subject to the grievance and arbitration provisions of this Agreement.
18

11.3

Any grievance or appeal of a grievance that is not ruled upon by the Employer within the

time limits herein shall be deemed denied and shall automatically proceed to the next step in this
grievance procedure.

ARTICLE 12
ARBITRATION

12.1

Procedure for requesting.
a.

A grievance as defined in the "Grievance" Article of this Agreement, which has

not been resolved thereunder and which a party wishes to take to Arbitration shall, within 10
calendar days, excluding weekends and holidays, after the completion of Step 4 of the Grievance
Procedure, be referred for arbitration by either party to this Agreement by directing a written
demand therefore to the Arbitration and Mediation Service ("AMS") and by sending a copy of
the notice to the other party.
b.

The arbitrator shall be a mutually agreed upon neutral third party selected from a

list of 9 potential arbitrators furnished by AMS who maintain an office within one hundred
twenty-five (125) miles of the City of Monroe, Ohio. Selection shall be by virtue of the strike
and rank method. The arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with AMS rules.
12.2

Fees. The fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties.

12.3

Binding effect. The award of the arbitrator hereunder shall be binding on the Employer,

the Employee and the Union.
12.4

Powers of the Arbitrator.
a.

The arbitrator shall not have the power to add to, subtract from, or modify any of

the terms of this Agreement. Furthermore, in explanation of the Employer's right to promulgate
rules and regulations, general orders and standard operation procedures set forth herein in the

19

Management Rights clause, the Union or grievant shall not have recourse through the grievance
and arbitration procedure to challenge the reasonableness or appropriateness of the Employer's
existing or future rules and regulations, general orders or standard operating procedures,
provided that the Employer has given the Union or Employees the required notice and permits
the Union, upon request, to meet and confer with respect to the proposed rule.
b.

This provision does not prevent an Employee disciplined by any such existing or

future rule to grieve the application of that rule to his particular circumstances.

20

ARTICLE 13
MISCELLANEOUS

13.1

OPBA Officials Roster. The OPBA shall provide the Administration an official roster of

its officers, sergeants and representatives within 30 days of the effective date of this Agreement.
This roster will be updated within thirty (30) days of any change, and will include the following:
a.

Name

b.

Address

c.

Home Telephone Number

d.

Immediate Supervisor

e.

OPBA Office Held

The Administration agrees that this roster shall not be made available to the public by the
Administration, that only Administration Employees with a legitimate need to know shall have
access to the roster, and that unlisted home telephone numbers will not be shared with anyone
outside the Administration. However, the parties recognize that the City may be required to
disclose the OPBA official roster pursuant to state or federal laws and that such disclosure made
pursuant to such laws does not constitute a violation of any provision of this Agreement.
13.2

Purchase of Service Weapon. A member who honorably retires from active duty may

purchase his/her service weapon from the Police Department if the member has twenty or more
years continuous service with the Department. The cost of the service weapon shall be One
Dollar ($1.00). In addition, the Employee will be provided with a retirement badge by the City
at no cost to the Employee.
13.3

Cell Phone. All sergeants will receive the option of utilizing a cell phone provided and

paid for by the City or may decline the City-provided cell phone and receive a monthly stipend

21

of Fifty-Two Dollars ($52.00) to defray the cost of providing his or her own cell phone for
utilization for departmental business.

22

ARTICLE 14
WAGES

14.1

Rates of pay for Employees shall be in accordance with the step schedule attached as

Appendix B, which rates will become effective beginning with the first full pay period after June
1, 2020. These rates of pay are subject to the conditions set forth below:
A. Application of Hourly Rates. The hourly rates as set forth under this section are
based on a 2080-hour work-year and shall be used to calculate salaries for hours
actually worked or in paid status for the appropriate pay range and pay step.
B. Evaluations. All step increases will occur on the officer's anniversary date provided
that the Employee has one full year in service with the Monroe Police Department
and has a satisfactory evaluation, including satisfaction of all departmental tardiness
and attendance standards.
C. Shift Differential: Sergeants who are assigned to second or third shift will be entitled
to an hourly shift bonus of $0.55, in addition to their regular hourly rate.
D. Benefits: All benefits that are affected by the mid-year start date of this Agreement
shall be prorated accordingly.
E. In addition to the increases set forth above, Sergeants' differential between the rank
of Patrol and Sergeant shall be 14% in accordance with Appendix B.
14.2

Specifications of the Pay Plan. The rate of pay for members affected by personnel
actions listed below shall be as follows:
A.

Disciplinary Demotion. Whenever a member is demoted for disciplinary reasons,
he shall be paid at the top step in the lower pay grade.

B.

Voluntary or Physical Disability Demotion.

23

(1)

Whenever a member with regular full-time status requests and is granted a
voluntary demotion, he shall be paid at the top step in the lower pay grade.

(2)

Whenever a member with regular full-time status is given a demotion by
reason of a service-connected physical disability, he shall be paid at the
top step in the lower pay grade.

(3)

Whenever a member is terminated due to either a lack of work and/or
funds in one classification and is entitled to an automatic demotion to a
lower classification where he previously held regular full-time status, the
rate of pay of the member shall be established as provided in ( 1) above.

(4)

Whenever a member is given a demotion due to a physical disability, his
rate of pay shall be established as described in either (1) or (2) above,
whichever is applicable.

C.

Re-appointment. Whenever a member is re-appointed to a position where he
previously held regular full-time status, his rate of pay shall be that at which he
was being paid at the time of his separation from that class with the approval of
the Chief of Police.

D.

Re-employment. Whenever a member is re-employed by the City, his rate of pay
shall be that at which he was being paid at the time of his separation from City
employment, with the approval of the Chief of Police.

E.

Return From Military Leave. Whenever a member returns from military leave, he
shall be restored to his former position at the step which corresponds to the step
he received at the time of his departure and, in addition, shall be granted any
increase in salary had he not entered the military.

24

ARTICLE 15
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME

This Article is intended solely to define the currently expected hours of work, which shall
be subject to change as the City determines in its discretion to be appropriate to meet operation
conditions, and to provide the basis for the calculation and payment of overtime. It does not
constitute a guarantee by the City that such hours or any overtime shall in fact be worked.
15.1

Definition.

The workweek shall consist of four (4) eight and one half (8 ½) hour

workdays and two (2) days off. Absent emergency conditions regarding otherwise, days off shall
always be consecutive days, though not necessarily in the same workweek.
15.2

Distribution of Overtime. The amount of overtime necessitated by call-back work and

the Employees required to work such hours shall be established by the City, provided, however,
that such overtime and call-back work will be distributed equitably and consistent with the needs
of the Police Department. An overtime list will be utilized in an attempt to fill call-offs. When
this procedure fails, the Employee with the lowest number of hours will be mandated to work. In
addition, when a vacancy is created by the absence of a sergeant, the opportunity to fill that
vacancy will first be offered to sergeants, regardless of their position on the overtime list. Offgoing Employees may be held over until vacancies can be filled. Such overtime list will be
zeroed out each January 1.
15.3

No Pyramiding. There shall be no duplication or pyramiding in the computation of

overtime or other premium wages. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to require the
payment of overtime and other premium pay more than once for the same hours worked.
15.4

Call-In Pay. Any Employee called in to perform work on a non-regularly scheduled duty

day shall be compensated for a minimum of three (3) hours pay at the applicable straight time (or

25

overtime, if applicable) rate for such work, unless the work is contiguous with the Employee's
regularly scheduled work hours. Where the work is contiguous with the Employees regularly
scheduled hours, the Employee shall be compensated for those hours actually worked.
15.5

Basis for Computing Overtime and Premium Pay. Overtime pay will be earned and

computed consistent with the following:
a. A 5 & 2 schedule Employee of the Police Department will receive overtime
compensation for all hours worked in excess of 80 hours per 14-day work period. The overtime
rate of pay will be one and one-half (1-1/2) times the Employee's hourly pay rate, as defined by
the Fair Labor Standards Act.
A 4 & 2 schedule Employee of the Police Department will receive overtime
compensation for all hours worked in excess of regularly scheduled hours during the two week
pay period, not including sick time off as set forth in 15.5b of this contract. The overtime rate of
pay will be one and one-half (1-1/2) times the Employee's hourly pay rate, as defined by the Fair
Labor Standards Act
b. As used in this section, hours worked shall be defined as set forth in the Fair Labor
Standards Act, as amended, except that vacation, holiday and personal days, as paid time off,
shall count toward that calculation of the overtime threshold referenced in paragraphs 15.5 a.
15.6

Exchange of Shifts. Employees shall have the right to temporarily exchange shifts when

the exchange does not interfere with the operation of the Police Department, subject to approval
by the Police Chief or his designee, and provided that the exchange does not result in the
payment of overtime to the parties involved. This shall be limited to no more than 3 exchanges
per month. An exchange request shall be authorized at least 3 days prior to the first exchanged
date.

Supervisory Employees may only exchange with supervisory Employees and non-

26

supervisory Employees may only exchange with non-supervisory Employees except when the
non-supervisory Employee would otherwise be assigned the duties of Officer In Charge (O.1.C.).
The Police Chief or his designee may refuse an exchange request if the request would affect
services to the City.
15.7

Shift Changes. The Employer, under ordinary circumstances, will not change shifts more

than (4) times per calendar year.
15.8

Notwithstanding paragraph 15.5 above, officers "frozen over" (held over unexpectedly

from their scheduled shift due to the absences of an officer scheduled for their relief) will be
entitled to overtime, at time and one-half (1 ½) their regular rate, for consecutive hours worked
beyond 8 hours for 5 & 2 Employees and 8 ½ hours for 4 & 2 schedule Employees or the length
of the next shift. This provision shall not apply to regularly scheduled double shifts.
15.9

Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 15.8, third shift officers may only be

involuntarily "frozen over" for a period not to exceed four (4) hours, with the exception of
regularly scheduled double shifts.

In the event a third shift officer declines to work a

consecutive frozen over eight (8) hour shift, the City retains the option of not staffing the
remainder of such following shift.
15.10 Compensatory Time.
a. All overtime work shall be compensated, at the Employee's election, either at the rate
of one and one-half (1 ½) the Employee's regular rate of pay, or in compensatory time accrued at
the same rate, which may be accrued and used up to a maximum of fifty (50) hours. All OVI
Grant hours worked by officers, due to Grant wording, must be taken as overtime pay and not to be
taken as compensatory time (per 4/16/12 MOU).
b. Compensatory time pursuant to the minimum standards of the Fair Labor Standards
Act ("FLSA") shall be granted according to law, provided forty-eight (48) hours advance notice
27

is given by the Employee. Compensatory time earned in excess of the minimum standards of the
FLSA shall be granted, provided forty-eight (48) hours advance notice is given by the Employee,
and provided that the City will not incur overtime liability as a result of honoring the
compensatory time request. The notice provisions of this section may be waived upon mutual
agreement of the parties.
c. Employees may choose to receive pay for any and all accumulated compensatory
time once annually, by notifying the Employer of his or her desire to be paid for a designated
amount of compensatory time. The payment will be made to the Employee within thirty (30)
days of receiving the request.
15.11 If an officer is switched from a 4 & 2 to a 5 & 2 schedule or a 5 & 2 to a 4 & 2 schedule
mid-year, efforts will be made to prorate benefits to the fairness of the employee and the City so
as to not short the employee of benefit hours.

28

ARTICLE 16
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE

16.1

Initial Issue. Upon appointment, each recruit shall receive a full issue of uniforms and

equipment from the City. All such purchases shall be made by the Monroe Police Department.
See Appendix A for list of equipment that shall be provided by the City, and items that can be
purchased out of clothing allowance. The City will maintain ownership of all items provided by
the City.
16.2

Annual Allowance.

a.

Sergeants. Sergeants in the bargaining unit shall, one year after their initial issue

following hire, receive an annual uniform and equipment allowance not to exceed One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) per year, effective June 1, 2014, on a pro-rata basis. This allowance shall be paid
in May annually. All such uniform purchases shall be made by the Employee from vendors approved
by the City or from other vendors, provided that the Employees obtain the specific items (brand type,
item model number, etc.) as determined by the Chief. No substitute items shall be acceptable. The
City will maintain ownership of all items purchased with allowance money that is provided to
Employees under this section that bear the insignia or any other mark of the City of Monroe Police
Department.
All uniforms and civilian clothing is subject to inspection and approval by the Chief or
designee.
16.3

Lost or Damaged Uniforms and Equipment.

The City will replace or repair, at the

discretion of the Chief, any damaged department property or equipment, including members'
uniforms, provided the loss or damage is not the result of the members' intentional abuse or
gross negligence, which shall be determined at the sole discretion of the Chief.

29

16.4

Damaged Eyeglasses or Watches. Eyeglasses or watches which are lost or damaged

while the bargaining unit member is engaged in the performance of their duties shall be
compensated for by the City at the current rate of replacement up to a limit of two hundred
($200) dollars. For an affected Employee to afford themselves the benefit of this reimbursement,
the Employee shall provide the Employer a written explanation of the incident that gave cause
for such loss or damage. Upon receiving such signed report, the Employer shall include the
proper amount of funds to comply with the requested reimbursement in the Employee's next pay.
Such reimbursement shall be made no more than once in any twelve (12) month period. This
section shall also apply to the replacement for loss or damaged contacts worn by Employees.
16.5

Dry Cleaning. Special cleaning will be provided for uniform items that have been soiled

by human/bodily fluids or chemicals. The Chief will determine whether this paragraph applies
to a particular item of clothing.
16.6

Bullet Proof Vests.

Bullet proof vests shall be replaced by the City once the

manufacturer's warranty period expires or as otherwise determined by the Chief of Police.

30

ARTICLE 17
HOLIDAYS
17.1

The following shall constitute legal holidays for all bargaining unit Employees:
New Years Day
Martin Luther King Day
Presidents Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Friday after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve Day
Christmas Day

17.2

For purposes of holiday pay, all Employees shall receive eight and one-half (8 1/2) hours

of compensatory time off to be used at a later date for each of the holidays in Section 1 above,
regardless of the schedule the Employee is placed on. An Employee who is required to work on
Thanksgiving, Christmas, or New Years Day, shall receive pay for the hours worked on the
holiday at a rate of time and one-half his regular rate. To qualify for holiday pay, an Employee
must work all of his scheduled hours of his last regular work day prior to the holiday, the
holiday, and all of his scheduled hours on the first scheduled work day immediately following
the holiday, unless his absence from work is due to illness or injury, in which event a physician's
certificate will be required.
Employees shall be permitted to either carryover or cash out up to 42.5 hours of holiday
compensatory time at the end of the calendar year. The carryover option will be the default;
employees electing a cash out must submit a request by December 1. Cash outs will be paid in
January to allow verification of year end balances.

31

ARTICLE 18
VACATIONS

18.1

Amount of Vacation. Each member of the bargaining unit shall have earned and be

entitled to vacation leave with pay, at his regular rate according to the following schedule:

18.2

Years of
Service

Annual
Accrual

0 to 1

0

After 1

85

After 5*

127.5

After 10

170

After 15

190

After 20

212.5

Effective January 1, 2018, Employees shall accrue vacation benefits each year on the

anniversary date of hire.

18.3

•

Newly hired Employees must complete field-training prior to use of any vacation
time.

•

Employees may use earned vacation time while on probation.

Scheduling of Vacations.

Vacation periods shall be determined by the Chief or

Supervising Lieutenant, who must act in a reasonable manner and not in an arbitrary and/or
capricious manner. There will be a reasonable effort to set available periods during the summer
months if possible, considering seasonal department work loading. Choice of vacation dates
during vacation periods shall be by seniority with conflicts to be determined in the interest of the
Chief of Police.

32

a. Minimum Notification for Vacation. Minimum Notice for Vacation (MNV) (defined
as vacation requests made with less than 7 days notice) shall be schedule through and authorized
by the on Patrol Lieutenant and the Chief of Police or his representative. These MNVs must be
requested and approved at a minim of 4 hours before the employee is scheduled to work. The
supervisor, prior to approval, will assess manpower needs and shift coverage. MNV can be used
for up to one entire shift. MNV can only be used by employees up to three (3) times a calendar
year.
18.4

Minimum Vacation Period. Eligible Employees may take their vacations in minimum

increments of not less than four (4) hours. The Chief shall schedule vacation leave, and the City
Manager or his designee shall approve an Employee's vacation request.
18.5

Pay for Accumulated Vacation. An Employee in full-time status who is to be separated

from the City service through resignation, retirement or layoff and who has unused vacation
leave to his credit, shall be entitled to compensation at this current rate of pay for all lawfully
accrued and unused vacation leave to his credit at the time of separation, consistent with the
limitations of this Article.
An Employee in full-time status who is to be separated from service through removal for
cause, and who has unused vacation leave to his credit, shall not be entitled to compensation for
accrued and unused vacation leave to his credit at the time of separation.
18.6

Vacation Buy-Back. Employees shall have the option to submit for vacation buy-back up

to 85 hours of their accumulated vacation time once per year. Buy-back will be paid at the
Employee's straight time rate and will be payable within thirty (30) days from approval of the
request. This benefit may be suspended by the City Manager, in his sole discretion, should the
City cash flow needs dictate.

33

18.7

Vacation Accrual Limits. Employees shall be permitted to allow vacation leave to accrue

to their credit in an amount up to 240 hours in addition to their current accrual rate. Employees
shall forfeit their right to take or be paid for any vacation leave to their credit which is in excess
of this limit. Such excess shall be eliminated from the Employee's balance.
18.8

Prior Service. Notwithstanding the provisions of Ohio Rev. Code § 9.44, an Employee

shall not be permitted to transfer accumulated vacation leave credits from prior service at a
previous place of employment with the State or any of its subdivisions.
18.9

Personal Days. Employees shall be entitled to two personal days (up to 17 hours) per

year, in addition to vacation, which may be used with the approval of the Chief of Police upon 24
hours notice, or 4 hours notice in the event of emergency or unforeseen circumstances. Said
approval may not be unreasonably denied.

34

ARTICLE 19
SICK LEAVE

19.1

Sick Leave Accrual. All Employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of 10.625 hours for

each month worked, and any sick leave accrued, but not used or converted as hereinafter
provided, in any year shall be accrued in succeeding years without limit.
19.2

Use of Sick Leave. An Employee eligible for sick leave shall be granted such leave with

full normal pay, to be scheduled by the department or division head and to be approved by the City
Manager or his designee, for the following reasons:
a. Personal illness or physical incapacity due to pregnancy, injury or contagious disease;
b. Illness of a member of the Employee's immediate family requiring the Employee's
personal care and attendance; sick leave may also be used for up to five (5) calendar days
absence at the time of birth of an offspring and subsequent convalescence of the Employee's
spouse;
c. Enforced quarantine of the Employee in accordance with the community health
regulations.
19.3

Sick Leave Verification. At least one (1) hour before the start of his/her assigned shift,

an Employee shall inform his/her immediate supervisor of the fact that they are reporting off
sick. The exception to the foregoing is when there is a provable inability to make a telephone
call.

Except in cases of suspected abuse of sick leave, an Employee will not be routinely

required to furnish, upon returning to duty, a physician's certificate evidencing that the absence
was for one of the reasons set forth in Section 2 above, or absences of seventeen (17) consecutive
duty hours or less. An Employee may be required to furnish a physician's statement, stating the
nature of the illness and the date the Employee may return to work, following an absence in
excess of seventeen ( 17) hours or more.
35

Furthermore, on or after an Employee's sixth (6th) sick leave occurrence, as defined in
paragraph 19.5, below, furnishing a physician's statement shall be mandatory.
Sick leave taken on the Employee's scheduled shift immediately before or immediately
after a holiday will require a physician's certificate before any sick leave will be paid.
An Employee using sick leave is required to fill out, sign and submit the City form
justifying the use of sick time, before receiving pay for the time used.
The falsification of the City sick leave form or a physician's certificate shall subject the
Employee to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge.
19.4

Abuse of Sick Leave. Grounds for suspicion shall include, but not limited to, information

received by the City that the Employee is, or was, during any day for which sick leave is
claimed:
a.

Engaging in other employment;

b.

Engaging in physical exercise or recreation;

c.

Present in a tavern or other place inconsistent with a claim of illness or injury;

d.

Absent from home or place of confinement or convalescence when called or

visited by representatives of the City, except in cases where the Employee can produce
verification (such as a hospital or medical clinic admission or treatment slip or a receipt for the
purchase of medicines from a pharmacy or reasonable explanation) that his absence was for
reasons directly related to the treatment of his/her illness or injury.
e.

Using sick time in a manner that reflects a pattern of use that may be inconsistent

with legitimate use.
19.5

Sick Leave Occurrences. An Employee who has eight (8) or more sick leave occurrences

in a twelve (12) month period shall not be compensated for sick leave for the first day of usage

36

for the ninth (9th) occurrence and subsequent occurrences at 80% of the Employee's regular rate
of pay. (Example: An Employee misses two (2) days and this is the ninth (9th) occurrence in less
than a twelve-(12) month period. The Employee will receive sick leave compensation for each
day missed at 80% of his/her regular rate of pay for each day of the ninth (9th) and subsequent
occurrences not to exceed six (6) such days in a twelve (12) month period.) Exceptions to the
occurrence rule would be an Employee off under a qualified Family Medical Leave Act usage or
being off due to a work related injury as qualified in the Injury Leave Article.
Sick Leave Occurrences are defined as separate occurrences where an Employee reports
off work for illness or non-work related injury. (Example: An Employee reports off work for
two days, that is one occurrence, then returns to work and sometime later reports off work again,
that is a second occurrence and so on.)
19.6

Minimum Charge to Sick Leave. Absence for a fraction of a day that is chargeable to

sick leave in accordance with these provisions shall be charged in increments of not less than two
(2) hours. Employees who, after reporting to work, are then sent home on sick leave shall be
charged for actual time absent.
19.7

Sick Leave Credit on Return to Service. An Employee who is laid off or on unpaid

disability leave will, upon reinstatement to service, be credited for any unused sick leave existing
at the time of his layoff or leave.
19.8

Sick Leave Credit Upon Transfer. Upon transfer from one division or department to

another, unused sick leave shall be available for the transferred Employee's use.
19.9

Payment of Sick Leave to Members Killed in Line of Duty. If an Employee is killed in

the "line of duty," the City shall pay the Employee's surviving spouse, or, if there is no surviving
spouse, the Employee's estate, all of the Employee's accrued, unused sick leave as of the

37

Employee's date of death.

For the purpose of this Section, "line of duty" means that the

Employee was performing official department business at the time of his death, or the
Employee's death proximately resulted from the member's performance of his/her lawful duties
as a Police Officer.
19.10 Workers' Compensation. No Employee may receive payment from the City for sickness
or injury if he is receiving Workers' Compensation for the same purpose. Therefore, once a
Workers' Compensation claim has been approved the Workers' Compensation checks will be
signed by the Employee and turned over to the City.

The City shall continue to pay the

Employee his/her regular paycheck during this period of time.
19.11 Pay for Accumulated Sick Leave. All Employees, at the time of their retirement or
resignation in good standing, with ten (10) or more years of service, shall receive payment based
on the Employee's rate of pay at retirement or resignation for accrued but unused sick leave up
to the following maximum accruals:
a. One-fourth (1/4) of the Employee's accrued but unused sick leave, up to a maximum
accrual of 600 hours.
b. One-third (1/3) of the accrued but unused sick leave in excess of 600 hours.
c. In no event shall sick leave be permitted to accrue in an amount greater than 1,000
hours.
d. If an Employee is separated from employment through a removal for cause and has
unused sick leave to his credit, he shall not be entitled to compensation for accrued and unused
sick leave to his credit at the time of separation.
19.12 The occurrence program set forth in paragraph 19.5 shall not apply to Employees who
reach and maintain in excess of six hundred fifty (650) accumulated sick leave hours.

38

ARTICLE20
INJURY LEAVE

20.1

Each full-time bargaining unit Employee shall be entitled to occupational injury leave

(OIL) to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days for each qualifying injury. OIL
shall be granted to an Employee who suffers an on-the-job injury or illness from an identifiable
incident that occurred in the course of performance of his/her official duties within the scope of
his/her employment with the Employer and who is off work due to said injury for five
consecutive shifts. This wait period may be waived in the sole discretion of the City Manager.
20.2

In the event of a service-connected injury or illness incurred in the active discharge of

duty, which injury is not the result of gross negligence, recklessness, self-infliction, or
"horseplay" by the Employee, the Employer shall grant the Employee full pay for a period not to
exceed one hundred twenty (120) calendar days.

This time shall not be charged to the

Employee's sick time.
20.3

An Employee applying for OIL hereunder shall authorize the release to the Employer of

all medical information pertinent only to the occupational injury possessed by the Employee's
treating physician(s) and the treatment facility(ies), if so requested by the Employer or its
designee, and/or shall agree to be examined by a licensed medical practitioner selected and paid
for by the Employer. At that time, the physician shall also document an estimated return to work
date for the injured Employee.
20.4

Any Employee claiming an occupational injury or illness under this Article shall file a

claim with the Ohio Bureau of Workers' Compensation (OBWC) as soon as possible. Upon
approval of the claim by OBWC, an OIL granted after the fifth consecutive shift absence shall be
made retroactive to the first day of absence, and any sick leave or vacation used by the Employee
during the first five work days of absence shall be restored to his/her credit. The Employee shall
39

remit to the Employer all income benefits paid by OBWC for the period during which the
Employee received full pay from the Employer while on OIL. In the event the claim is denied
by OBWC, the Employee shall revert to sick leave status and shall be charged with sick leave
and/or vacation leave for all time paid by the Employer for OIL.
20.5

The Employee must report to the City Manager, or his designee, once a week, or

otherwise approved timeframe by the City Manager, during OIL. During the period of OIL,
there shall be no employment outside of the Employee's home. If the Employee will be working
from his home or from a charitable or civic organization he/she will have to receive prior
approval from the City Manager, or his designee.
20.6

It is understood and agreed that the Employer's obligation under this Article is only the

Employee's regular rate of pay. If the Employee elects not to accept OIL, the City will not be
obligated to compensate the Employee over the amount paid by OBWC. The Employee will also
be responsible for paying any portion of Health Care Benefit normally responsible for under this
contract and will be invoiced that amount by the City monthly.
20.7

In lieu of granting OIL, the Employer may assign the Employee to transitional work with

the approval of, and within the limitations set by, the Employee's treating physician or physician
selected and paid for by the Employer. It is strictly the management right of the Employer to
determine if transitional work is available.
20.8

No entitlement to OIL shall arise from a personal injury sustained while an Employee is

engaged in outside employment of any nature, whether or not such employment is in a law
enforcement related field.
20.9

Before an Employee on injury leave will be permitted to return to duty, he/she shall

submit to the City Manager's office a physician's statement and any other required

40

documentation concerning the injury, demonstrating his/her physical ability to satisfactorily
perform the duties of his/her position. Additionally, the City Manager may require the Employee
to submit to an examination by a physician selected by the City, at the City's expense, if there is
any question about the Employee's ability to return to duty.
20.10 The Union and Employees agree with the Employer's Transitional Work Policy, if any,
which shall not be limited in any way by this Agreement.
20.11 The Employee will be required to attend all scheduled meetings, unless his/her absence
from the meeting has been approved by the Chief of Police, or his designee or the Employee is
excused by his or her treating physician. The Employee on OIL will not receive overtime, for
attending scheduled meetings, consultations, etc.

41

ARTICLE21
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE, MILITARY LEAVE, JURY LEAVE AND OTHER LEAVE

21.1

Funeral Leave.
a. Any 5 & 2 schedule employee may be granted usage of funeral leave, upon

scheduling by the Chief and upon approval of the City Manager or his designee, for a maximum
of five (5) days in the event of a death of an immediate family member. Any 4 & 2 schedule
employee may be granted usage of funeral leave, upon scheduling by the Chief and upon
approval of the City Manager or his designee, for a maximum of four (4) days in the event of a
death of an immediate family member. For purposes of this policy, the "immediate family" is
defined as mother, father, child (including step-child), spouse, grandparents, siblings,
grandchildren, stepparents, stepchildren, step siblings, or legal guardian or other person who
stands in place of the Employee's parent.
b. Any regular full-time Employee may be granted usage of funeral leave, upon
scheduling by the Chief and upon approval of the City Manager or his designee, for a maximum
of three (3) days in the event of a death of the following family members: brother-in-law, sisterin-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt or uncle.
c. One (1) day of funeral leave may be granted by the City Manager or designee for the
death of any legal relative or member of the Employee's household other than those listed above.
d. Funeral leave may be used to grieve, to attend the funeral, make funeral arrangements
or attend to other matters directly related to the funeral.
21.2

Military Leave. Military leave shall be in accordance with applicable federal, state, and

local laws.
21.3

Jury Leave. The City shall grant full pay to an Employee who is summoned for jury duty

or subpoenaed as a witness by any court or other adjudicatory body in cases that arise from a
42

bargaining unit Employees employment with the City. All compensation for such duty must be
reimbursed to the City, unless such duty is performed totally outside normal working hours. The
City will not pay Employees for court appearances in connection with the Employee's personal
matters. This includes, but is not limited to proceedings related to personal traffic citations,
divorce proceedings, custody, and juvenile proceedings. If absence from work is necessary for
personal matters, the Employee may use vacation time or take an unpaid leave, however, the
Employee must request prior approval for this leave to be granted.
21.4

Other Unpaid Leave. In addition to leave specifically addressed in this Agreement, the

City Manager, at his sole discretion, may authorize other leaves of absence without pay. The
City Manager's decision to grant or not grant a leave of absence not addressed in this Agreement
is not grievable.

43

ARTICLE22
INSURANCE

22.1

Insurance. The City shall offer a group health care, vision, and dental care insurance

program to Employees, equivalent to that offered to other City Employees.
22.2

Health and Dental Care Insurance Premiums. Effective June 1, 2017, the Employee's

premium share for health care and dental shall be 17% for the duration ofthis Agreement.
22.3

Insurance - General Provision.
a. With respect to all insurance coverage provided to Employees, the City retains the

right to change insurance carriers or self-insure all or any portion of the benefits as long as the
level of benefits remain substantially the same.
b. A difference between any Employee (or his beneficiary) and the insurance carrier(s)
or the processor of claims shall not be subject to the grievance procedure provided for in any
collective bargaining agreement between the City and the Union. The City will, however,
designate representatives who will be available for consultation with claimant Employees (or
with a designated Benefit Claim Representative of the Union), so that a full explanation may be
given with respect to the basis of disposition of claims.
c. The failure of any insurance carrier(s) to provide any benefit for which it has
contracted shall result in no liability to the City or to the Union; nor shall such failure be
considered a breach by the City or the Union of any obligation undertaken under this or any
other agreement.

Nothing in this Agreement, however, shall be construed to relieve any

insurance carrier from any liability it may have to the City, Union, Employee or beneficiary of
any Employee.
d. The terms of any contract or policy issued by an insurance carrier shall be controlling
in all matters pertaining to benefits thereunder.
44

22.4

If the Employer offers an alternative "buy-up" plan, in addition to the Employee premium

share provided in paragraph 22.2, above, Employees selecting such buy-up plan, as the name
indicates, shall pay any additional cost incurred by the City between the City's base plan and the
buy-up plan.
22.5

Life Insurance.

The Employer shall provide and pay for term life insurance for all

Employees in the amount of $25,000.
22.6

Employees who waive healthcare, dental and vision insurance coverage, upon proof of

coverage elsewhere, shall be paid a lump sum of $2,500 for a single plan and $3,500 for a family
plan on the first pay date in November of each plan year.
22.7

Effective January 1, 2015, health insurance coverage for spouses of Employees will be

provided upon certification by the Employee that the Employee's spouse is not eligible for insurance
coverage from the spouse's employer, subject to the following:
a. In order for a working spouse or adult child to be ineligible for the City of Monroe's
health plan, the following situations must apply. First, the working spouse must work thirty (30) or
more hours per week, the employer must pay 50% or more of the employee only premium and the
plan must meet the Affordable Care Act standards. Spouses who work less than thirty (30) hours, are
offered a substandard plan or pay more than 50% of the employee only rate are eligible for the City
of Monroe's plan.
b. In order for a working adult child to be ineligible for the City of Monroe's health plan,
the following situations must apply. First, the adult child has to be 19 years of age or older. Under
certain situations in the State of Ohio, dependent child(ren) can remain on their parent's plan until
age 26, or even 28, with further restrictions. Second, the working adult child must work thirty (30)
or more hours per week, their employer must pay 50% or more of the employee only premium and
the plan must meet the Affordable Care Act standards. Adult children who work less than thirty (30)
45

hours, are offered a substandard plan or pay more than 50% of the employee only rate are eligible for
the City of Monroe's plan.
c. This Working Spouse/Adult Dependent Child Carve Out Policy only applies to spouses
and children who are actively at work at an employer group. It does not apply to self-employed
spouse/children who have an individual medical plan (non-company sponsored), receive health
insurance through a company or government retirement plan, Medicare or COBRA.

46

ARTICLE23
SAFETY AND HEALTH

23.1

The City and the Union shall cooperate fully to maintain the highest standard of safety

and health in the Police Department in order to eliminate as much as possible accidents, deaths,
injuries, and illness in the Police Department.
23.2

The Police Chief or Supervising Lieutenant shall have discretion to remove apparatus

from service if in his opinion the mechanical condition of the apparatus warrants removal and he
has inspected and filled out the proper paperwork. The final decision and responsibility as to the
serviceability of a piece of equipment will rest with the Police Chief.
23 .3

The City will agree that blood tests for carbon monoxide poisoning will be provided upon

request for any Police Officer treated in a hospital for inhalation of an irrespirable atmosphere
and the Police Officer will be given a report of the test upon request. The City will pay any
legitimate cost for blood tests not covered by medical insurance or Worker's Compensation as
deemed necessary by medical personnel.
23.4

The Chief of the Police Department will determine the types, quality and quantity of all

equipment issued for use in the Department.

Patrol vehicles will, at a minimum, include

shotgun, shotgun racks and plexiglass screens. Where such items are not present, they will be
installed or replaced within a minimum of six months.
23.5

There shall be two members from the Police Department appointed to the City-wide

Safety Committee. One shall be designated by the Police Chief; the other shall be a Union
member designated by the Police Chief.
23.6

The City will continue to furnish safety apparel and equipment consistent with the Ohio

Industrial Commission Standards.
47

23.7

The City will provide, upon request by any member of the Police Department, an

inoculation for prevention of Hepatitis, Type B.
23.8

Upon written request, damaged safety equipment and apparel shall be sent for repair and

replaced within ten (10) working days after examined by the Police Chief.
23.9

The City will provide, upon request, within a reasonable time, a test for any Employee

that through documentation has been exposed to a serious infectious disease, such as AIDS,
meningitis, etc. while performing his duties as deemed necessary by medical personnel. The
City will pay any legitimate cost for the test not covered by medical insurance or workers'
compensation, as well as reasonable expense.
23.10 The City will endeavor to schedule three officers per shift and endeavor to maintain a
minimum of two officers at all times per shift.

48

ARTICLE24
RESIDENCY
As a condition of continued employment, Employees must reside within twenty-five (25)
miles of the City of Monroe Police Headquarters. Newly hired Employees must relocate within
thirty (30) days of the completion of their probationary period.

49

ARTICLE25
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE

The Union agrees with and supports the City's drug testing program and is committed to
ensuring a safe, drug free workplace. To achieve that goal, the Union hereby agrees to adhere to
a drug testing policy in place at the ratification of this Agreement or that is developed by the City
hereafter. Implementation of a drug testing policy or any major changes to the City's drug
testing program shall be first submitted to the Union for its consideration prior to such
implementation or change.

50

ARTICLE26
MODIFICATION, SEPARABILITY AND CONFLICT OF LAWS

Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, the provisions of this Agreement shall be
conclusive as to all bargainable matters relating to wages, hours of work, and working conditions
as more fully set forth herein. Therefore, the Employer and the Union, for the term of this
Agreement, each agree that the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with respect to
any subject matter referred to or governed by the Agreement unless the Employer and the Union
mutually agree to alter, amend, supplement, enlarge, or modify any of its provisions.
Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be illegal or unenforceable by a
court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force
and effect for the duration of this Agreement. In the event of invalidation of any Article or
Section of this Agreement, the parties may agree to meet, if a meeting is requested in writing,
within 30 days of such request for the purpose of renegotiating said Article or Section.
The parties agree that this Agreement will be the sole and exclusive recourse available to
Employees and the parties hereto, and where provisions of this Agreement conflict in any
manner with otherwise applicable provisions of Ohio law, this Agreement shall prevail pursuant
to Ohio Revised Code Section 4117 .1 0(A).

51

ARTICLE27
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

At the sole discretion of the Police Chief, Employees may hold outside employment so
long as they meet the performance standards of their job with the Employer. The outside job
shall not conflict with the Employee's duties as a member of the Police Department. Employees
shall consider the impact that outside employment may have on their health and physical
endurance. All Employees will be judged by the same performance standards and will be subject
to the Employer's scheduling demands, regardless of any existing outside work requirements.
If the Police Chief determines that an Employee's outside work interferes with his
performance or the ability to meet employment requirements of the Police Department, the
Employee may be required to terminate the outside employment if he desires to retain Police
Department employment.
Outside employment that constitutes a conflict of interest is prohibited.
The Injury Leave Article of this Agreement shall not apply to Employees who are injured
during outside employment.
This Article is not intended to prohibit paid employment with the Police Union.

52

ARTICLE28
SENIORITY

28.1

Definition. Seniority shall be defined as the length of continuous service measured in

years, months and days that an Employee has accumulated as a full-time Employee in the service
of the Police Department.
28.2

Accrual.
a. An Employee's seniority shall commence after the completion of the probationary

period and shall be retroactive to the first day the Employee reported for work.
b. Seniority shall accrue during a continuous authorized leave of absence without pay up
to six (6) months or for the period of an approved maternity leave, provided that the Employee
returns to work immediately following the expiration of such leave of absence or maternity
leave; and during a period of continuous layoff not to exceed 6 months, if the Employee is
recalled into employment; and during a sick leave of up to 12 months.
28.3

Loss of Seniority. An Employee's seniority shall be lost and employment terminated

when he:
a. terminates voluntarily;
b. is discharged for cause;
c. exceeds an official leave of absence;
d. is laid off for a period of more than 1 year if the Employee has less than 5 calendar
years seniority; or is laid off for a period of more than 2 years if the Employee has more than 5
calendar years seniority (during such periods of layoff the Employer will not hire new
Employees);
e. fails to notify the Employer in writing of his intent to return to work on a recall from
layoff, within 5 days after the Employer has sent notice to him to return by letter or telegram
53

with a copy to the Union to the last address furnished to the Employer by the Employee. It shall
be the responsibility of the Employee to advise the Employer ofhis current address.
28.4

Application. Seniority shall apply in layoffs and recalls and for scheduling of vacations

as provided in the general orders, rules, regulations and procedures of the Employer.
28.5

Layoff: In the event of a layoff, probationary Employees will be laid off first without

regard to their individual periods of employment. Non-probationary Employees shall be laid off
next in order of their seniority. In the event a Sergeant becomes subject to a layoff, he/she shall
be permitted to take a position as a police officer. Recalls will be made by seniority when the
former position as a Sergeant becomes available again.
28.6

Recall. Whenever a vacancy occurs in a position for which a laid off Employee is

qualified, such Employees shall be recalled in accordance with their seniority in the reverse order
in which they were laid off.

54

ARTICLE29
WAIVER IN CASE OF EMERGENCY

29.1

In cases of emergency declared by the President of the United States, the Governor of the

State of Ohio, the Butler County Sheriff, the City of Monroe, or the Federal or State Legislature,
such as for Acts of God or civil disorder, the following conditions of this Agreement may be
temporarily suspended by the Employer:
A.
B.
Employees.
29.2

Time limits for the processing of grievances; and
All work rules and/or agreements and practices relating to the assignment of

Upon the termination of the emergency, should a valid grievance exist, it shall be

processed in accordance with the provision outlined in the grievance procedure of this
Agreement and shall proceed from the point in the grievance procedure to which they had
properly progressed prior to the emergency.

55

ARTICLE30
DURATION OF AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall be effective as of midnight on the 1st day of June, 2020, and shall
remain in full force and effect until midnight on the 31st day of May, 2023.
If either party desires to modify or amend this Agreement, it shall give written notice of
such intent no earlier than 120 calendar days prior to the expiration date of this Agreement, and
no later than 90 calendar days prior to the expiration date of this Agreement. Such notice shall
be via certified mail with return receipt requested or a date and time stamped letter of intent. The
parties shall commence negotiations within 2 calendar weeks upon receiving notice of intent.
Failure to give the required notice shall result in the expiration of the Agreement, or its
continuation for a period of 1 year, at the option of the Employer.
The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations, which resulted in this Agreement,
each had the unlimited right to make demands and proposals on any subject matter not removed
by law from the area of collective bargaining, and that the entire understandings and agreements
arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this
Agreement. The provisions of this Agreement constitute the entire Agreement between the
Employer and Union and all prior agreements, practices and policies, either oral or written are
hereby canceled.

Therefore, both parties, for the life of this Agreement, voluntarily and

unequivocally waive the right, and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated, to bargain
collectively or individually with respect to any subject or matter not specifically referred to or
covered in this Agreement, even though such subjects or matters may not have been within the
knowledge of either or both parties at the time they negotiated or signed this Agreement.

56

FOR THE OHIO PATROLMEN'S
BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

FOR THE CITY:

L-6..____ _
William J. Brock, City Manager

~
Director

Karen Ervin
Director of Finance

Approved as to fonn:
f

5-, \

~

K. Philip Callahan, Law Director

57

APPENDIX A

Uniform items to be issued as per Article 16:
1
I
5
5
5
2
2
3
1
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
I
I

Jacket, waterproof
rain coat
winter shirts
summer shirts
trousers
caps, dress and knit "Police"
ties
police badges, 2 large shield for coat, I small for wallet
cap badge
pair of collar brass, two small and one large for coat
name plates
duty belt
trouser belt
duty holster
double magazine pouch
chemical agent (i.e., mace)
mace pouch
asp
asp holder
handcuff cases - or - ldouble cuff case
sets of handcuffs
portable radio
radio holder
duty weapon with three magazines
belt keepers
pair waterproof boots
pair of shoes -or- additional pair ofboots
metal clip board
metal citation clip board
bullet proof vest and carrier
biohazard glove case
TAZER with 2 cartridges
TAZER holster
duty bag
flashlight

Items that can optionally be purchased using clothing allowance:
Whistle
Whistle chain
Bullet proof vest
Additional vest carrier
58

Heavy duty boot socks
Leather patrol duty gloves
Extra handcuffs
Off duty holster
Ventilated t-shirts
Binoculars
Tie tacks
Recording device
Duty bag
Class "A" Uniform
Stinger stream light
Stinger light holder
In addition, the department shall provide the officers with biohazard gloves, notepads, pens, and
duty ammunition as needed. Also, any item not listed above may be purchased with the
allowance, provided that advance permission is obtained from the Chief of Police or his
designee.

59

APPENDIX B
[INCREASES OF 3.0% = 2020; 3.0% = 2021; AND 3.5% = 2022)
PATROL OFFICER
STEP ONE

STEP TWO

STEP3

STEP4

STEP 5

STEP 6**

Officers in

After Field

Field Training

Training

$48,342

$53,007

$58,139

$63,784

$69,995

$73,495

lilin:tiRalQd

STEP ONE

STEP TWO

STEP 3

STEP4

STEP 5

STEP 6

June 1
2020

•••

Officers in

After Field

Field Training

Training

$49,792

$54,597

$59,883

$65,698

$72,095

$75,700

$79,485

$§1,§3§

$56,508

$61,979

$67,997

$74,618

$78,350

$82,267

SlQp QRQ
June 1
2021
June 1
2022

SERGEANTS*
June 1, 2020

June 1, 2021

June 1, 2022

$83,784

$90,613

$93,784

•sergeant Differential= 14%
** Current Step 5 officers will move to St ep 6 on their anniversary date after 6/1/2020.

*** Step# references are adjust ed on 6/1/2021 due to elimination of prior Step 1 and addition of new St ep 6.
Officers will transition equitably to the adjust ed scale in 2021. Example: 2020 St ep 3 will move to 2021 Step 2
on 6/1/2021 and then increase to 2021 Step 3 on their anniversary date after 6/1/2021.
