AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE TOWN OF MERRIMACK, NEW HAMPSHIRE
AND
LOCAL #2986 OF THE AMERICAN FEDERATION
OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
(AFSCME)

July 1, 2023 through June 30, 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I: AGREEMENT ...................................................................................................................... 1
ARTICLE II: PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE III: RECOGNITION ................................................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE IV: EXCLUSIONS ................................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE V: NON-DISCRIMINATION ................................................................................................. 4
ARTICLE VI: STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS ........................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE VII: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ............................................................................................. 4
ARTICLE VIII: CONSULTATION .......................................................................................................... 5
ARTICLE IX: UNION BUSINESS ............................................................................................................ 6
ARTICLE X: DUES DEDUCTION ........................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE XI: MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP............................................................................ 7
ARTICLE XII: DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION FOR CAUSE..................................................... 7
ARTICLE XIII: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE........................................................................................ 8
ARTICLE XIV: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME ......................................................................10
ARTICLE XV: SENIORITY ....................................................................................................................13
ARTICLE XVI: WORK REDUCTION OR LAYOFFS ........................................................................14
ARTICLE XVII: JOB POSTING .............................................................................................................14
ARTICLE XVIII: SALARIES ..................................................................................................................14
ARTICLE XIX: SUPPLEMENTAL COMPENSATION (BENEFITS) ...............................................15
ARTICLE XX: VACATIONS ...................................................................................................................23
ARTICLE XXI: HOLIDAYS ....................................................................................................................24
ARTICLE XXII: BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ..........................................................................................25

ARTICLE XXIII: CLOTHING ................................................................................................................26
ARTICLE XXIV: SAFETY .......................................................................................................................27
ARTICLE XXV: PROMOTIONS AND TRANSFERS ..........................................................................27
ARTICLE XXVI: MISCELLANEOUS ...................................................................................................28
ARTICLE XXVII: SEPARABILITY .......................................................................................................29
ARTICLE XXVIII: EFFECT OF AGREEMENT ..................................................................................29
ARTICLE XXIX: CONTRACTING AND SUBCONTRACTING OUT ..............................................29
ARTICLE XXX: DURATION OF AGREEMENT .................................................................................30
APPENDIX A – WAGE SCHEDULE ......................................................................................................A1

ARTICLE I: AGREEMENT
This agreement between the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire (hereinafter
called the "Town"), and Local 2986, American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees (hereinafter called the "Union"), is made and entered into
on this 1st day of July 2023.

ARTICLE II: PURPOSE
The general purpose of this Agreement is to set forth agreements reached between
the Town and the Union with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment for employees in the bargaining unit described in the
recognition clause.

ARTICLE III: RECOGNITION
1. The Town recognizes the Union as the exclusive bargaining agent for all
permanent (regular) members of the town's Department of Public Works as
shown below:

HIGHWAY DIVISION
Maintainer I
Equipment Operator I
Equipment Operator II
Equipment Operator III

Page 1 of 30

EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE
DIVISION
Mechanic I
Mechanic II

WASTEWATER DIVISION
Operator I
Operator II
Laboratory Technician
Operator II/Lab Technician
Mechanic I
Mechanic II
Equipment Operator II
Equipment Operator III
Equipment Operator III – Sewer Crew

SOLID WASTE DIVISION
Recycling Attendant
Equipment Operator III
2. The term "employee" as used herein refers to members of this unit. This
includes those employees who are employed on a permanent (regular)
schedule of 30 hours per week or more in the classifications listed above.
Probationary, temporary and part-time employees (working less than 30 hours
per week) are excluded from the definition of employee and thus the unit.

Page 2 of 30

ARTICLE IV: EXCLUSIONS
1. The agreement excludes the classifications and positions of:
Assistant Director
Secretary I and II
Superintendent/Supervisor
Foreman
Dispatcher/Operations Assistant
Scale Operator
Solid Waste Supervisor
Chief Operator
Assistant Chief Operator
Maintenance Manager
Laboratory Manager
Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Manager
Sewer Inspector
Construction Inspector
Assistant Maintenance Manager
2. The exclusion of members from the unit for the purpose of assuming
confidential status shall be preceded by discussion with the union. Any
impasse in this area shall be submitted to the Public Employee Labor
Relations Board for resolution.

Page 3 of 30

ARTICLE V: NON-DISCRIMINATION
The town and the union agree not to discriminate against a member of the unit
because of the individual’s age, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation,
gender identity, race, color, marital status, genetic information, physical or mental
disability, religious creed, national origin, veteran status or any other
characteristic protected by local, state or federal law, or membership or nonmembership in the union.

ARTICLE VI: STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
Under no circumstances will the union cause, encourage, sponsor or participate in
any strike, sit-down, stay-in, stay-out, sick-in, sick-out, work slowdown,
withholding of services or any curtailment of work or restriction or interference
with the operations of the department during the term of this agreement.

ARTICLE VII: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
1. The parties agree that all of the rights and responsibilities of the town which
have not been specifically provided for in this agreement are retained in the
sole discretion of the town whose right to determine and structure the goals,
purposes, functions, and policies of the town without prior negotiation with
the union and without being subject to the grievance and arbitration
procedures of this agreement shall include but not be limited to the following:
a. The right to direct employees; to determine qualifications, promotional
criteria, hiring criteria, standards for work, and to hire, promote, transfer,
assign, retain employees in positions; and to suspend, demote, discharge
or take other disciplinary actions against an employee for proper and just
cause, subject to the other provisions of this agreement, including
grievance and arbitration;
b. The right to relieve an employee from duty because of lack of work or
other legitimate reasons;
c. The right to take such action as in its judgment it deems necessary to
maintain the efficiency of department operations;
d. The right to determine the means, methods, budgetary, and financial
procedures, and personnel by which the departmental operations are to be
conducted;

Page 4 of 30

e. The right to take such actions as may be necessary to carry out the
missions of the departments in case of emergencies;
f. The right to make rules, regulations, and policies not inconsistent with the
provisions of this agreement and to require compliance therewith; and
g. The right to subcontract.
2. The exercise of the management rights and responsibilities of the town set
forth hereby, except discipline and discharge, shall not be subject to the
grievance procedures set forth in this agreement; grievances alleging a failure
to comply with such procedure will be subject to grievance Article XIII of this
agreement, except that where a management right is specifically required to be
exercised in accordance with a specific procedure as provided in this
agreement, grievances alleging a failure to comply with such procedure will
be subject to grievance Article XIII of this agreement.
3. It shall also be the right of the union, however, to present and process
grievances of its members whose wages, hours, or working conditions are
changed in violation of this agreement.

ARTICLE VIII: CONSULTATION
1. Representatives of the union may meet with the department head or a designee
once each month to discuss matters of mutual concern, including those matters
necessary to the implementation of this agreement. A written agenda shall be
submitted by the Union to the department head or the designee no less than
five days before the scheduled date of the meeting. At the discretion of the
department head or the designee, additional matters for discussion may be
placed on the agenda. When such is the case the union will be given five days
to consider the matter prior to its discussion. Nothing contained herein shall
prevent the department head or the designee and the union from meeting on a
more or less frequent basis upon mutual agreement.
2. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the union from consulting with the
department head or the designee at any time, if matters of mutual concern
arise of an urgent or emergency nature. However, grievances must be
submitted in accordance with the procedure contained in this agreement.

Page 5 of 30

ARTICLE IX: UNION BUSINESS
1. The union officers and representatives shall be President, Vice President,
Secretary/Treasurer, Stewards (2).
2. The union shall advise the town of the names of the employees holding the
above union offices within thirty days after election.
3. Union officers as described above shall be permitted to process grievances
and exercise the Consultation Article during their scheduled hours of duty,
provided they have prior permission from the department head or a designee
and the amount of time in which employees are engaged in such activities is
reasonable.
4. An effort will be made to schedule at least half of the negotiating sessions at a
time which does not conflict with the scheduled duty of employees who are
members of the union collective bargaining team. In the event that
employees, not to exceed three in number who are members of the union's
negotiating team, are scheduled for duty at a time during which a collective
bargaining meeting will be held, said employee will be permitted to
participate in negotiations without loss of pay.
5. Employees elected as delegates to the AFSCME International Convention, N.
H. Public Employees Convention, Council #93 or the N.H. State Labor
Council Convention, shall be allowed time off with pay to attend these
conventions. The union is restricted to a total absence of three working days
per calendar year, travel time included, but may select which of the above
conventions and the number of employees among which to distribute the three
days. Approval will be granted upon written petition by the union which
specifies names, dates, and conventions to be attended.

ARTICLE X: DUES DEDUCTION
1. The town agrees to withhold dues from the members of the union weekly and
submit a check along with a list of employees who paid said dues and in what
amount, at least once each month, to the treasurer of AFSCME, Local #2986.
2. The union shall submit authorization forms to the Town Finance Department
for each member who requests payroll deduction of dues.
3. No weekly deductions will be made whenever the employee's weekly pay is
an insufficient amount to cover the deduction. In no case will the town
attempt to collect fines or assessments for the union beyond the regular dues.

Page 6 of 30

ARTICLE XI: MAINTENANCE OF
MEMBERSHIP
1. Members of the bargaining unit who, on the effective date of this agreement
are members of the union, and employees who become members of the
bargaining unit and the union after that date, shall continue their memberships
in the union during the duration of this agreement provided, however, that
employees may at their discretion and in writing, withdraw their memberships
from the union any time within the period between 120 days and 60 days prior
to the expiration date of the agreement.
2. Should there be a dispute between an employee and the union over the matter
of an employee's union membership, the union agrees to hold the town
harmless in any such dispute.
3. The union shall post notices on departmental bulletin boards 120 calendar
days prior to the expiration date of the agreement advising employees of their
right to terminate payment of dues and union membership.

ARTICLE XII: DISCIPLINE AND
TERMINATION FOR CAUSE
1. All discipline shall be for just cause and shall be appropriate to the infraction
for which the disciplinary action is being taken.
2. Disciplinary action will normally be taken in the following order; however,
the sequence need not be followed if an infraction is sufficiently serious to
merit a greater disciplinary action.
a)

verbal warning

b)

written warning

c)

suspension without pay

d)

discharge

3. All warnings, suspensions, and discharge notices shall be in written form and
identify the reason for the action and shall be signed by the employee as an
acknowledgment of the action only. Employees shall be given 48 hours to
respond to a written spot performance appraisal (SPA) and, unless the parties
mutually agree to extend the deadline, the Town shall make disciplinary
determinations within ten (10) working days of receiving the employee’s

Page 7 of 30

comments, if any are received. The employee will receive a copy of such
warnings and notices, and the union shall be informed within five working
days that the employee has received disciplinary action. Upon written request
of the disciplined employee to the Town Manager or a designee, the union
shall be provided a complete copy of the disciplinary action.
4. Employees may examine their own individual personnel files at reasonable
times under the direct supervision of the employer.
5. In determining the appropriate disciplinary action to take against an employee,
the Town may consider any prior infraction(s) that resulted in a suspension
without pay for the period of five years from the date discipline is imposed.
Further, the Town may consider prior in fraction(s) that resulted in a written
warning for up to three years from the date discipline was imposed. Verbal
warnings will be removed, at the request of the employee, after two years.

ARTICLE XIII: GRIEVANCE
PROCEDURE
1. Definition
a. A grievance under this article is defined as an alleged violation of any
provision of this agreement except Article VII (Management Rights) in
which an individual grievant alleges a personal loss or injury.
b. NOTE: Employees who have a "complaint" may take up the complaint
with their immediate supervisors verbally before they can process the
complaint as a formal grievance. Immediate supervisors shall give their
answers within five (5) work days. It is anticipated that nearly all
complaints can be resolved informally without grievance. Each grievance
must be submitted in writing by the union and must contain a statement of
the facts surrounding the grievance, the provision(s) of this agreement
allegedly violated and the relief requested.
2. Procedure
a. Step One: An employee, or the union on behalf of an employee, desiring
to process a grievance must file a written statement of the grievance to the
department head or the designee no later than fifteen (15) work days after
the employee knew, or should have known, the facts on which the
grievance is based. The department head or the designee shall meet with
the employee and the union representative within ten (10) work days
following receipt of the notice and shall give a written decision within ten
(10) work days thereafter.
b. Step Two: If the employee or the union on behalf of an employee is not
satisfied with the decision of the Step One Hearing Officer, they may file,
within ten (10) work days following the department's decision, a written

Page 8 of 30

appeal to the town manager or a designee, setting forth specific reasons
why the employee or the union believes the agreement is being violated by
the town action in question. Within ten (10) work days following receipt
of the appeal, the town manager or the designee shall either issue a written
decision or schedule a hearing. Said hearing shall be held no later than
twenty (20) work days following receipt of the appeal and written decision
shall be rendered within ten (10) work days thereafter.
c. If the union is not satisfied within the disposition of the grievance or no
decision has been rendered by the town manager within ten (10) working
days after the town manager received the grievance and prior to
submission of the grievance to arbitration, representatives of the union and
management may, by mutual consent, meet to determine if the grievance
can be settled without arbitration.
d. Step Three: If the employee or the union on behalf of an employee is not
satisfied with the decisions of the town at Step Two, the union may file,
within ten (10) work days following receipt of the last decision, a request
for arbitration to the American Arbitration Association or, by mutual
agreement, the Public Employees Labor Relations Board, under its rules
and regulations. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding
on the parties.
3. The cost of the arbitration shall be borne by the losing party. It shall be
incumbent upon the arbitrator to specify the party designated as the losing
party to facilitate payment of arbitration costs.
4. The foregoing time limitations may be extended by mutual written agreement
of the parties.
5. Failure of the grievant to abide by the time limits set out in this article shall
result in the grievance being deemed settled on the basis of the last decision
made by the appropriate hearing officer on behalf of the town.
6. The town shall not designate a hearing officer at any step of the grievance
procedure who has heard the grievance at a prior step.

Page 9 of 30

ARTICLE XIV: HOURS OF WORK AND
OVERTIME
1. Normal Work Schedules
(1) The normal work schedule shall be forty hours per week at
times operationally required by the requirements of the job.
2. Work Day and Work Week
(1) The workday is defined as 12:01 a.m. until 12:00 midnight.
The workweek is defined as 12:01 a.m. Sunday until 12:00
midnight on the subsequent Saturday.
3. Overtime
a. Any work outside of the employee's regularly scheduled work hours shall
be paid at the overtime premium of 1.5 times the employee's base hourly
rate. All overtime assignment performance shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Overtime Policy of the Town of Merrimack Department of
Public Works.
b. Employees who work more than twenty hours in a work week outside their
regularly scheduled work hours shall be paid overtime at the rate of two
times their base hourly rates for each hour worked beyond twenty outside
their regularly scheduled work hours. For the purpose of this subsection,
callbacks paid as three hours shall be counted as three hours.
c. No provision of this Agreement will be interpreted to pay an employee their
overtime rate of pay more than once for the same overtime hours – i.e.,
overtime hours will not be pyramided.
4. General or universal changes in the hours of work (shifts) in excess of a
change of one hour will be negotiated with the union prior to change; if a
change of one hour or less is made, a one-week notice will be provided to all
affected employees.
5. Employees who have completed their normal shifts and are called back to
work for overtime shall be compensated at time and one-half for a minimum
of three hours. Persons who have left their place of employment and who are
recalled to work prior to the next normal shift will be paid for a minimum of
three hours at the rate of time and one-half provided, further, that employees
who are called back for overtime or emergency work and who complete the
required task and return to their residences within the three-hour minimum
guarantee may be called back for additional emergency or overtime without
an additional three hours minimum work guarantee. It is the purpose and
intent of this section to assure an employee of at least three hours of pay at
overtime rates for the inconvenience of being called back to work between the
normal shifts, but not to be separately paid for several call-backs within the
three-hour minimum guarantee period. "Persons who have left their place of
Page 10 of 30

employment" are defined as those who have punched out on the time clock
prior to having been asked to work overtime.
6. There shall be no interrupting of normal schedule to avoid payment of
overtime.
7. A ten-minute break will be provided during the morning normally scheduled
work period. This break is to be taken at the employees assigned work site for
the day.
8. The normal work day is eight consecutive hours of work. Employees are
allowed to eat their lunch (30 minute lunch break) during these working hours
without loss of pay.
9. Employees shall not be required to work overtime in a division outside of the
one in which they perform their normal job duties.
10. Differential Pay
a. Employees regularly scheduled to work on Saturdays and/or Sundays shall
receive an additional $1.00 per hour for such work actually performed.
b. Employees required to operate snow removal vehicles equipped with wing
plows shall be paid an additional $2.00 per hour while operating said
equipment during snow plowing only.
11. If employees are scheduled to work a regularly scheduled shift but, in the
opinion of management, are unable to do so because of fatigue due to an
extended tour of duty, employees may be instructed to use sleeping
accommodations provided on the department's grounds or be asked to return
home for rest and recuperation. If so instructed, employees will receive their
regularly scheduled straight-time pay for the shift. To qualify to be paid for
the remainder of the shift, employees shall remain available for immediate
recall to work until the start of their next regular shift or for twenty-four
hours, whichever is shorter.
12. Wastewater On-Call. An employee will be paid two hours at base hourly rate
for each 24-hour period that the employee is required to wear a pager.
Employees wearing a pager are expected to respond to alarms at the
wastewater treatment facility and respond either by way of electronic means
or in person if the alarm shall so warrant. Members of the union interested in
the overtime shall be pre-qualified by the administration. Employees wishing
to be removed from the on-call list must give 30 days notice. Employees that
cannot fill a scheduled on-call shift must make arrangement with other
qualified employees to swap shifts. Failure to act responsibly may be grounds
for the employee’s name from being permanently removed from the list. This
provision shall become effective upon ratification by the voters and the parties
agree to execute a side bar agreement to that effect. The 2 hour stipend is in
addition to any overtime applicable to responding to the page. Employees
shall be paid an extra 2 hours at 1.0 times their base hourly rate for each
Page 11 of 30

observed Holiday (24-hour period) (based on that employee’s regular
schedule) under Article XXI Holidays that the employee is required to be oncall. If there are not sufficient volunteers the Town may only mandate unit
employees hired on or after February 1, 2023 to fill shifts.
13. Work assignments scheduled in advance that are to be worked outside of the
normal workday shall not be subject to the call-back provision (3 hour
minimum at 1.5 times hourly rate) in paragraph 5 of this section. i.e.: Voting
day.

Page 12 of 30

ARTICLE XV: SENIORITY
1. There shall be two types of seniority:
a. Department Seniority: Department seniority shall relate to the time an
employee has been continuously employed by any of the town
departments represented by this agreement.
b. Classification Seniority: Classification seniority shall relate to length of
time an employee has been employed in a particular classification.
2. Classification seniority in the classification involved shall prevail in matters
concerning layoffs. Qualified and available former regular employees shall be
reinstated before new employees are hired following a layoff. This preference
shall expire after one year.
3. No employee shall have the right of replacing another employee in any
classification by virtue of department seniority alone, except that in the event
of a permanent lack of work in any classification, those employees affected in
that classification shall be assigned, when operationally possible, to the next
lower classification for which they are qualified. Absolute "bumping rights"
are not to be assumed by the foregoing.
4. Until new employees have served the initial six-month probationary period, it
shall be deemed that they have no seniority status, and they may be discharged
or laid off with or without cause, and such discharge or layoff shall not be
subject to the grievance procedure.
5. Employees shall not forfeit seniority during absences caused by:
a. Illness resulting in total temporary disability due to their regular work with
the town, certified to by an affidavit from the worker's compensation
carrier.
b. Illness resulting in total temporary disability, certified to by a physician's
affidavit.
6. Employees shall lose their seniority for, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
a. discharge for just cause
b. resignation.
7. The employee's present classification seniority as of the effective date of this
contract, shall be the only type of seniority considered for the purpose of
establishing the classification seniority system called for in this article. This
classification seniority must have been continuous in nature to merit
consideration under this section. The preparation and maintenance of the
Page 13 of 30

classification seniority roster shall be the responsibility of the department
head.

ARTICLE XVI: WORK REDUCTION OR
LAYOFFS
1. If there is a layoff or any reduction in the work force, the person with the least
seniority in the affected classification within the affected division will be laid
off first. These laid-off employees will be recalled in the reverse order of
layoff. The person with the most seniority will be hired back first.
2. All employees who have been laid off will be kept on a re-employment list for
a minimum of one year.

ARTICLE XVII: JOB POSTING
1. All permanent opportunities within the unit must be posted for one week and a
copy of the posting sent to the union.
2. Job posting shall include job specifications, rate of pay, job location (by
division) and the shift.
3. Current bargaining unit employees shall be given an opportunity to apply for
all vacant and/or newly-created positions.

ARTICLE XVIII: SALARIES
1. All members of the bargaining unit will receive a pay increase equal to the
amounts set forth in Appendix A – Pay Table.
2. When experience possessed by a newly-employed unit member is in excess of
that required for the job, that employee may be started at a step up to Step 3
(1-3 Yrs.) in recognition of the prior experience. Effective July 1, 2020, when
experience possessed by a newly-employed unit member is in excess of that
required for the job, that employee may be started at a step up to Step 5 in
recognition of the prior experience and qualifications. Upon successful
completion of the probationary period, such employee shall be moved to the
next higher step on the salary schedule, unless such an employee is hired at
Step 5, in such case the employee shall not step again until they have been in
the position for the required length of time for the next higher step.
3. Any employee who is promoted into a higher classification shall be placed on
the lowest step which reflects an increase in the hourly rate of pay of at least
Page 14 of 30

5% for that individual. This right may be waived upon agreement between the
president of Local #2986 and the town. A promoted individual shall serve six
months on performance probation, during which time unsatisfactory
performance may be cause for demotion to the formerly held position or its
equivalent. Upon successful completion of the probationary period, the
employee shall be moved to the next higher step on the salary schedule and
shall not step again until they have served in that position for the required
length of time to qualify for the next step, if one exists.
4. Movement between steps shall be based upon the satisfactory performance of
the employee. The performance evaluation dated closest to the anniversary
date for the step increase shall be used to make the judgment. A performance
evaluation which generally rates the employee's overall performance as
"Excellence" or "Success” justifies a step increase. An evaluation which
generally indicates that the employee's overall performance needs
improvement may, at management's discretion, justify denying a step
increase. Improvement in performance may make the employee eligible for
the increase at a later date.
5. Whenever a step increase has been approved, it will become effective on a
Sunday for payroll purposes. If the anniversary date falls on Monday,
Tuesday, or Wednesday, the preceding Sunday shall be the effective date of
the raise. If the anniversary date falls on a Thursday, Friday, or Saturday, the
following Sunday shall be the effective date.
6. When employees assume the duties and responsibilities of a higher
classification, they shall receive either the minimum of the range for such
classification or an increase of five percent per hour, whichever is greater, for
each full hour worked, including break periods, in that classification.

ARTICLE XIX: SUPPLEMENTAL
COMPENSATION (BENEFITS)
1. Health Insurance
a. Employees shall be eligible for participation in the Access Blue New
England Site of Service HMO Plan (ABSOS20/40 1KDED RX10/20/45)
with $20 office co-pay and $40 specialist co-pay and deductibles of
$1,000 per member, per year and $3,000 per family, per year with RX
Plan R&M10/20/45 or, at the Town's option, in another HMO plan or an
indemnity plan that provides significantly comparable coverage and
Employee out-of-pocket costs. The Blue Cross Comp 100 and Matthew
Thornton HMO plans previously offered to all Town employees, as well
as Blue Cross' Blue Choice plan, shall be acceptable alternatives to the
Union should the Town choose to select one; however, the Town shall
have the right to obtain Employee health insurance coverage from any

Page 15 of 30

insurance carrier or to self-insure for any portion of said coverage after
consultation with the Union.
b. The Town shall pay 100% primary plan HMO of the health insurance
premiums relating to an Employee’s coverage and 100% of the premiums
relating to the Employee’s spouse and dependent children.

c. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town and the Union agree that if
any portion of the parties’ negotiated health insurance plan will
trigger the application of the so-called “Cadillac Tax,” as it may be
amended, the parties shall also follow the procedure below:
(1) It is agreed that the Town or Union may immediately reopen
this Agreement solely for the purpose of negotiating any
changes in the health insurance plan that may be necessary to
avoid the application of the Cadillac Tax to the Town or any
plan administrator, insurer, risk pool or plan participant, or to
assure that the plan is legally compliant. An initial bargaining
session shall be held within ten (10) business days of a
request to reopen, unless another schedule is agreed to by the
parties. The Town shall assist the Union in obtaining plan
design and pricing information from insurance providers.

(2)

If within ninety (90) days of either party’s request to reopen
this Agreement, the parties are unable to agree on changes in
the health insurance plan necessary to avoid the Cadillac Tax
and/or achieve legal compliance, then the issue shall be
submitted to expedited binding interest arbitration. The
interest arbitration shall proceed as follows:
i.

The parties agree that the special nature of this
issue may require an arbitrator with specific
knowledge of the Affordable Care Act, as it may be
amended; therefore, the parties will make every
effort to mutually agree on an arbitrator with such
specialized knowledge. If the parties cannot agree
upon an arbitrator, an arbitrator shall be selected
using the procedures described in ARTICLE XV,
Grievance Procedure.

ii.

The interest arbitration hearing shall be held no
later than thirty (30) days after either party declares
Page 16 of 30

that the reopened negotiations on health insurance
are at impasse, unless otherwise agreed to by the
parties.
iii.

The Town and the Union shall each submit to the
selected arbitrator a proposal for modifying the
negotiated health insurance which shall avoid the
Cadillac Tax. The Town and the Union shall
exchange their proposals not less than ten (10) days
prior to the arbitration hearing.

iv.

The arbitrator shall be empowered to select either
the Town’s proposal or the Union’s proposal
(“final offer” arbitration) and is expressly not
empowered to fashion his or her own modifications
to the negotiated health insurance plan.

2. Dental Insurance
a. Employees shall be eligible for participation in the current town’s dental
insurance plan or, at the Town's option, in another plan that provides
significantly comparable coverage and Employee out-of-pocket costs.
The Town shall have the right to obtain Employee dental insurance
coverage from any insurance carrier or to self-insure for any portion of
said coverage.
b. The Town shall pay 90% of the dental insurance premiums relating to an
Employee's coverage and 90% of the premiums relating to his spouse and
dependent children. Employees shall be responsible for the remaining
10% of the dental plan premium
3. Life Insurance
a. Employees shall receive the following term life insurance coverage, and the Town
shall pay 100% of the related premiums.
Employee life
Employee accidental death and
dismemberment
Spouse life
Child life - under 6 months
Child life - 6 months and older

1x annual salary rounded to
nearest $1,000, whichever is
greater
1x annual salary rounded to
nearest $1,000, whichever is
greater
$ 10,000
$5,000
$5,000

Page 17 of 30

b. The supplemental life insurance program that is currently available for
Employee participation at their own expense shall continue to be offered
solely at the Town's option.
4. Disability Insurance
a. Employees shall receive short-term disability insurance coverage
providing a weekly benefit equal to the lesser of 70% of their base weekly
wages or $700.00 per week for a 26-week period. This benefit shall be
payable from the first day of a covered accident or the eighth day of a
covered illness.
b. The Town shall pay 100% of the related premiums.
c. During a covered absence, an Employee may elect to receive 100% of his
or her base weekly wage from the Town and to have such payments
charged against his or her accrued sick leave balance until exhausted and
then, if necessary, against his or her accrued vacation balance. Town
payments shall be discontinued when both accrued leave balances have
been exhausted. All disability benefit checks from the insurance carrier,
that relate to the period for which such payments are made by the Town,
shall be endorsed to the Town and credited to the Employee's accrued
leave balances.
d. An Employee that becomes eligible for a weekly disability benefit must
apply for that benefit.
e. The Town and/or its disability insurance carrier shall have the right to
request updates of medical information during a covered absence and to
designate a physician for a related medical examination, for which the
Town shall pay the cost.
f. Any covered absence must be supported by a physician's statement that
outlines the nature of the Employee's disability and that provides an
estimated date for the Employee's return to full duty. Immediately upon
an Employee's return to duty from a covered absence, he shall provide to
the Town a physician's statement certifying as to the Employee's fitness
for duty.
g. During a covered absence, no Employee shall engage in any form of
employment.
5. Worker's Compensation
a. Employees shall receive workers compensation insurance coverage as
prescribed by, and to the extent required by, the laws of the State of New
Hampshire.
b. The Town shall pay 100% of the related premiums.
c. During a covered absence, an Employee may elect to receive 100% of his
or her base weekly wage from the Town and to have such payments
Page 18 of 30

charged against his or her accrued sick leave balance until exhausted and
then, if necessary, against his or her accrued vacation balance. Town
payments shall be discontinued when both accrued leave balances have
been exhausted. All workers compensation benefit checks from the
insurance carrier, that relate to the period for which such payments are
made by the Town, shall be endorsed to the Town and credited to the
Employee's accrued leave balances.
d. An Employee that becomes eligible for a workers compensation benefit
must apply for that benefit.
e. The Town and/or its workers compensation insurance carrier shall have
the right to request updates of medical information during a covered
absence and to designate a physician for a related medical examination,
for which the Town shall pay the cost.
f. Any covered absence must be supported by a physician's statement that
outlines the nature of the Employee's disability and that provides an
estimated date for the Employee's return to full duty. Immediately upon
an Employee's return to duty from a covered absence, he shall provide to
the Town a physician's statement certifying as to the Employee's fitness
for duty.
g. During a covered absence, no Employee shall engage in any form of
employment.
6. Unemployment Compensation
a. Employees shall receive unemployment compensation insurance coverage
as prescribed by, and to the extent required by, the laws of the State of
New Hampshire.
b. The Town shall pay 100% of the related premiums.
7. During any paid absence of more than 30 calendar days, except one covered
by workers compensation insurance, the Town will pay the Employee's group
insurance premiums only for the first 12 weeks of the absence. Thereafter, the
Employee may keep the insurance coverage in force by paying to the Town
the related premiums for each month by the last day of the preceding month.
An Employee's failure to pay premiums on a timely basis shall be sufficient
grounds for the termination of insurance coverage. During any absence
covered by workers compensation insurance, the Town’s portion of the
Employee's group insurance premiums will continue to be paid fully by the
Town.
8. Any questions or disputes concerning benefits paid by the insurance policies
or plans described in this section shall be resolved in accordance with the
terms and conditions set forth in said policies or plans and shall not be subject
to the grievance procedure included in this Agreement. The failure of any
insurance carrier to provide any benefit for which it has contracted or for
Page 19 of 30

which it is obligated shall result in no liability to the Town, nor shall such
failure be considered a breach by the Town of any obligation undertaken by
this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement shall be so construed as to relieve
any insurance carrier from any liability that it may have to the Town, to any
Employee, or to any beneficiary of an Employee.
9. Personal Leave
a. Employees may be granted up to 16 hours of non-cumulative paid leave
each contract year to deal with personal matters.
b. Employees must obtain prior approval from the Department Head or
designee in order to use personal leave.
c. Personal leave may be used in fifteen minute increments or by the shift
and/or in conjunction with the use of accrued sick leave balances.
d. All personal leave requests shall be made to the Department Head or a
designee giving as much prior notice as possible. If a 24-hour notice is
given, no explanation for the personal time request will be required. No
request will be denied unless it will adversely affect departmental
operations.
10. Military Leave
Upon presentation of appropriate military leave and earnings statements, the
Town shall pay an Employee, who is a member of the US Armed Forces
Reserve Components (including the National Guard) and who is called to
active duty or activated for training, the difference between straight-time pay
lost and the amount of taxable pay received for up to 14 calendar days per
calendar year.
11. Witness/Jury Duty
An Employee called as a juror or a witness shall be paid by the Town the
difference between any related compensation received by the Employee from
the court or an attorney and the amount of the Employee's basic wages that
were lost during the required absence. Satisfactory evidence of jury or
witness duty and the time served, must be submitted to the Department Head.
Employees shall report to their regular work assignment as soon as possible
after being excused from jury duty.
12. Paid Sick Leave.
a. Employees shall earn sick leave at the rate of 1.85 hours per week (96
hours per year). Sick leave shall accrue at this rate regardless of the
number of hours actually worked in a week, except that no Employee shall
accrue sick leave during an unauthorized or unpaid absence. That portion
of an applicable Employee's accrued sick leave balance that exceeds 240
Page 20 of 30

hours at the end of any fiscal year (July 1 through June 30) will be
purchased by the Town at the rate of 50% times the Employee's base
hourly wage. The related payment will be made on the last pay day of the
subsequent July.
b. Sick leave shall be paid at the Employee's base hourly wage.
c. To be eligible for sick leave usage, an Employee must notify the
Department Head of the impending absence not later than one half hour
(30 minutes) before the start of his or her shift
d. The Town may require medically documented evidence of the cause of
sick leave if an Employee is absent for three or more consecutive shifts.
Such evidence may be required for any use of sick leave by an Employee
whose prior use, in the Department Head's opinion, has been excessive.
e. After ten (10) years of service for the Town of Merrimack, and upon
separation from Town employment under favorable conditions, employees
shall be paid at 2/3rds (66%) of their base hourly wages for their accrued
sick leave balances.
13. Family and Medical Leave
The Town will grant job-protected, unpaid Family and Medical Leave to
Employees to the extent required by the Town's Family and Medical
Leave Act policy.
14. Authorized Absence Without Pay
At the discretion of the Town Manager, a leave of absence without pay
may be granted for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks for unusual
circumstances. Such absences will be for the purpose of tending to
personal affairs or other compelling or urgent reasons which the employee
is unable to cover with accrued paid ordinary leave. All other unpaid
leaves shall be in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave. During
any unpaid absence, the employee shall be responsible for all insurance
premiums and shall not accrue any sick, personal or vacation leave.
15. While on bereavement leave, personal leave, sick leave, or family and medical
leave, no Employee shall engage in any form of employment.
16. During any paid absence of more than 30 calendar days, except one covered
by workers compensation insurance, the Employee will accrue personal leave,
sick leave, and vacation leave only for the shorter of the first 12 weeks of the
absence or the period that the Employee remains in pay status through the use
of accrued personal, vacation, and sick leave balances. During any absence
covered by workers compensation insurance, an Employee will continue to
accrue personal leave, sick leave, and vacation leave.

Page 21 of 30

17. Educational Reimbursement
a. The Town shall pay 100% of the cost of any Employee education or
training that is required by the Town or by New Hampshire Statutes to
assist him in maintaining his minimum job requirements or in adequately
performing the tasks to which he is regularly assigned.
b. In the event of a job change made by the Town that requires an upgrade in
an Employee's Commercial Drivers License, the additional cost related to
the upgrade shall be reimbursed by the Town.
18. Ambulance Service
Fees for services rendered to Employees by the Town-operated ambulance
service shall be waived or paid by the Town.
19. Retirement
The Town agrees to provide members of the bargaining unit with NH
Retirement System Group I Plan retirement benefits as required by law.
20. Bi-Weekly Payroll
The Union agrees the Town may convert to bi-weekly pay once all other
Town employees have converted to bi-weekly pay.
21. After 12 consecutive hours of work during an emergency or winter weather
event, the Town will provide a meal reimbursement of up to $15.00 as long as
employee submits a completed Town Expense Voucher along with an
itemized receipt for meal items purchased during the worked hours of the
event. Requests must be submitted within 14 calendar days of the purchase.
22. Maternity Leave
The Town’s Maternity Leave Policy shall apply to Employees in this unit.

Page 22 of 30

ARTICLE XX: VACATIONS
1. Vacation benefits shall be provided to full-time (regular) employees and shall
be figured from the hire date as follows:

Less than 5 years
At least 5 years but
less than 10
At least 10 years
but less than 15
At least 15 years

Earned
Weekly
(Hours)

Accrual
Maximum
(Hours)

1.54
2.31

160
240

3.08

320

3.85

400

2. Newly hired employees shall not be eligible for paid vacation leave during
their trial period.
3. Forty hours will be added to the accrued vacation leave balance of a full-time
employee when that employee initially becomes eligible for one of the weekly
accrual increases in "1" above, beginning with the five year anniversary.
4. Employees are encouraged to take vacation time to which they are entitled in
their current anniversary year. Employees shall be entitled to carryover
vacation time up an amount equal to two times their then annual accrual
amount. Any vacation time in excess of two times the annual accrual amount
must be used or it will be forfeited at the end of the year.
5. Upon employee request, the department head or a designee shall schedule
vacations. Employees must obtain prior approval from the Department Head
or designee in order to use vacation leave. Employees must request use of
vacation leave in writing giving as much notice as possible, but at least 24
hours in advance. Such request shall not be unreasonably denied. In the event
of a documented emergency, requests for use of vacation leave made less than
24 hours in advance may be granted at the Department Head or designee’s
discretion as long as the employee contacts the Department Head/designee by
phone or in person prior to their scheduled shift to make the request. Each
Division will post the name and contact information of the designated person
to contact to request vacation use in an event of an emergency. An employee
may not take more than ten consecutive days vacation leave without specific
approval from the department head.
6. Employees with the greatest seniority shall be given preference in selecting
the time they wish to take their vacations. The final determination for
scheduling shall rest with the department head or the designee; however,
Page 23 of 30

conflicts in scheduling shall be resolved on the basis of the department's needs
and seniority in classification.
7. Vacation pay shall be figured at the regular straight-time rate for the number
of straight-time regular hours per day the employee normally works.
8. In the event of termination, layoff, retirement, or death, eligible employees or
their beneficiaries shall be entitled to payment for all unused accrued vacation
time.

ARTICLE XXI: HOLIDAYS
1. All employees in Highway, Equipment Maintenance, as well as Wastewater
employees whose regular schedule is Monday through Friday, except
temporary and part-time employees, shall be paid the holidays listed below. A
holiday that falls on a Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday,
while a holiday that falls on a Sunday shall be observed on the subsequent
Monday.
New Year's Day

Columbus Day

President’s Day

Veterans' Day

Floating Holiday

Thanksgiving Day

Memorial Day

The Friday after Thanksgiving

Independence Day

Christmas Day

Labor Day
For all other employees, except temporary and part-time, all holidays, except
the floating holiday shall be observed on the actual date of the holidays listed
below.
New Year's Day – 1/1
Floating Holiday – Used within the calendar year
President's Day - 3rd Monday in Feb.
Memorial Day - Last Monday in May
Independence Day - 7/4
Labor Day - First Monday in Sept.

Page 24 of 30

Columbus Day - Second Monday in October
Veteran's Day - 11/11
Thanksgiving - 4th Thursday in Nov. and the following Friday
Christmas - 12/25
NOTE: A request to take the floating holiday shall be presented to the
department head or the designee at least 48 hours prior to the planned
absence. Should a concern arise because a number of employees have
requested the same day, seniority shall prevail. The maximum number of
employees on a floating holiday at any one time shall be determined by
the department head. The floating holiday must be used within the
calendar year and shall not be cumulative.
2. All work performed on a holiday shall be at the rate of time and one-half over
and above the eight hours pay for the holiday for all hours worked.
3. Employees shall be entitled to the holiday pay referred to in paragraphs 1 and
2 if they work or are in pay status the regular work day preceding and
following the particular holiday, but not otherwise.
4. If employees are required to work on a holiday, or if a holiday falls on an
unscheduled work day, they may be granted, if requested by the employee and
approved by the department head, a day off with pay in lieu of holiday pay
anytime within 30 days of the occurrence.

ARTICLE XXII: BEREAVEMENT
LEAVE
1. All full-time employees shall be granted paid leave in the event of the death of
an immediate or extended member (See Definitions) of his or her family or
the death of one other person that resides in the employee's household and that
has been so identified by the employee in advance and in writing to the Town
Manager. The bereavement leave period shall be four consecutive calendar
days and shall be used within 14 days of the date of the death.
2. Normally, employees will be expected to use bereavement leave immediately
after notification of death as stated in paragraph 1 above. However, the Town
Manager may approve a request, with concurrence of the Department Head,
for use of 4 consecutive calendar days of bereavement leave to be delayed up
to six months after notification of death if, at the time of notification, the
employee notifies the Town in writing of circumstances requiring delayed use
of bereavement leave.

Page 25 of 30

Immediate Family
A relationship legally described as:
Spouse
Guardian
Parent/Step-parent
Son/Daughter-inBrother/Sister
Parent-in-Law
Law
Step-brother/sister
Child/Step-child
A relative currently domiciled in the employee’s
household
Extended Family
A relationship legally described as:
Grandparent
Grandparent-in-Law
Brother/Sister-in-Law
Grandchild

ARTICLE XXIII: CLOTHING
1. All regular and prospective regular employees shall be entitled to $300.00 per
employee per fiscal year in the form of a credit at a store/supplier who agrees
to accept a town purchase order for the purpose of purchase of approved
safety footwear. From July 11th to June 30th annually, all employees shall first
purchase at least one pair of safety footwear, and then may purchase
additional safety footwear or any combination of the following items from the
balance of the fiscal year credit:
•

laces

•

insoles

•

socks

•

waterproofing fluid

•

Prescription Safety Glasses
Any unused portion of the fiscal year credit shall be returned to the
Town after June 30th annually.

2. The town will provide without charge to employees, both approved headgear
(a cap and/or a helmet) and a T-shirt. When the issued T-shirt is worn as the
outer garment, and the helmet is not required, the wearing of the cap shall be
optional. The identifying cap shall be worn at all times when the identifying
T-shirt is not worn as the outer garment.
3. Employees are responsible for reporting to work in neat and clean clothing
appropriate for the job assignment for the day. Failure to do so, or failure to
have as part of that apparel the headgear and/or T-shirt as described in
paragraph 2 of this article, will result in employees being excused from work
without pay until they present themselves in appropriate attire for work.
Page 26 of 30

4. If safety glasses are required, they will be furnished or protective coverings
will be provided in lieu of prescription safety glasses. The Town shall provide
an allowance up to $85.00 for approved prescription safety glasses once every
2 years beginning on July 2023 (ie. July 2023, July 2025, July 2027, etc.).
Employees hired during a year that the prescription safety glasses allowance is
available shall be eligible for the allowance. Employees hired during a year
that the prescription safety glasses allowance is not available shall not be
eligible for the allowance until the next year that it is available.
5. In addition, during a fiscal year that the prescription safety glasses allowance
is available, those employees eligible for the prescription safety glasses
allowance shall first purchase at least one pair of safety footwear, and then
may use the balance of that fiscal year boot allowance toward the purchase
prescription safety glasses.
6. Employees will be provided a "uniform service" which shall include two (2)
winter coats and includes cleaning of such clothing worn at work. Employees'
personal clothing (outerwear) shall not be worn at work and clothing provided
by the town shall not be worn outside of work except while traveling to and
from work. This practice is a safeguard motivated by health and safety.

ARTICLE XXIV: SAFETY
1. The department shall have the right to make regulations for the safety and
health of its employees during their hours of employment. Representatives of
the department and the union may meet once in ninety days at the request of
either party to discuss such regulations. The union agrees that its members
who are employees of the department will comply with the department's rules
and regulations relating to safety, economy and efficiency of services to the
department.
2. The Safety Committee of the union employees and management shall meet at
least once every thirty days.

ARTICLE XXV: PROMOTIONS AND
TRANSFERS
1. The town reserves and shall have the right to make promotions and transfers
but shall be governed by classification seniority when the qualifications and
experience of the persons being considered are equal.
2. Jobs to be filled through promotion shall be posted on the town bulletin
boards for a period of five working days. Management shall make a

Page 27 of 30

determination of the filling of such posted positions no later than 30 working
days after the close of the posting period.
3. After an award is made of a promotion the name of the person promoted shall
be posted for five working days following said award.
4. Vacancies in management positions which are specifically excluded from the
bargaining units shall be posted on the departmental bulletin boards.
5. Job postings shall include job specifications, rate of pay, job location, the shift
and also if the job is of a permanent nature.
6. Upon receiving promotions, employees' names shall be entered at the bottom
of the appropriate classification seniority list to which they have been
promoted, regardless of the department seniority, and they shall be considered
to be the junior or least senior employees in that classification, regardless of
the department seniority of other employees already in that job, until such
time as other promotions/hirings are made into this classification. New
promotions/hirings shall be entered at the bottom of that particular
classification seniority list concerned. If promoted employees do not
successfully complete their new positions' probationary periods, or if they are
unsatisfied with the positions within 30 days after assignment, then they shall
be returned to their old classifications at the earliest date that is operationally
possible and regain their former classifications and associated seniority.

ARTICLE XXVI: MISCELLANEOUS
1. Intra-Unit Relations
Since it is to be benefit of all that harmonious, fraternal relations prevail in the
departments, any disputes which may arise between and among members of
the unit and which have major consequences of their performances, shall at
the department head's discretion be referred to the bargaining agent for
mediation and resolution.
2. The town shall provide a bulletin board for the posting of notices of the town
and departments addressed to the employees and for notices of the union
addressed to its members. The department shall locate its bulletin board at a
convenient place. No notices shall be posted in or around the town property
except on such boards and then only after approval by the town as being
suitable for posting. No union notice shall be posted unless it has been signed
by the president or secretary of the union.

Page 28 of 30

ARTICLE XXVII: SEPARABILITY
In the event any provision of this agreement in whole or in part is declared to
be illegal, void or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction or any
administrative agency having jurisdiction, all of the other terms, conditions
and provisions of this agreement shall remain in full force and effect to the
same extent as if that provision had never been incorporated in this agreement
and in such event, the remainder of this agreement shall continue to be
binding upon the parties hereto.

ARTICLE XXVIII: EFFECT OF
AGREEMENT
1. This instrument constitutes the entire agreement of the town and the union,
arrived at as a result of collective bargaining negotiations, except such
amendments hereto as shall have been reduced in writing and signed by the
parties.
2. The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which resulted in this
agreement, each had unlimited right and opportunity to make demands with
respect to any subject or matter not removed by law from the area of
collective bargaining, and that the understandings and agreements arrived at
by the parties after the exercise of that right and the opportunity are set forth
in this agreement. Therefore, the town and the union, for the life of this
agreement, each voluntarily and unqualifiedly waives the right, and each
agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain collectively with respect
to any subject or matter referred to, or covered by this agreement, or with
respect to any subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered in this
agreement, even though such subjects or matters may not have been within the
knowledge or contemplation of either or both of the parties at the time they
negotiated or signed this agreement.

ARTICLE XXIX: CONTRACTING AND
SUBCONTRACTING OUT
1. The town recognizes the concern of the union in regard to contracting and
subcontracting out work which results in reduction of the work force.
2. If the town or a department of the town covered by this agreement changes its
methods of operation which involves contracting out work which is now being
performed by bargaining unit employees, the town and/or department will
give notice to the union of its intention. Furthermore, the town will attempt to
absorb affected employees into other town positions. In those cases where
Page 29 of 30

Appendix A – Wage Schedule

AFSCME 2986
Attachment A - Pay Table
Effective July 1, 2022 _ No Contract wages Frozen
Position/classification
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3 Step 4 Step 5
New Hire 6 Months 1 Year 3 Years 5 Years
Maintainer I
14.91
15.45
16.02 16.61
17.37
Recycling Attendant
17.74
18.39
19.07 19.80
20.68
Equipment Operator I
19.47
20.05
20.24 21.14
22.09
Operator I
20.05
20.59
21.14 22.09
22.63
Mechanic I
20.34
20.88
21.41 22.52
23.62
Equipment Operator II
20.59
21.14
21.85 22.74
23.60
Compost Foreman
21.15
21.70
22.70 23.33
24.22
Equipment Operator III
21.30
22.04
23.13 24.22
25.11
Equipment Operator III - Sewer 0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Lab Technician
22.55
23.09
23.63 24.13
24.73
Operator II
21.95
23.03
24.12 25.21
25.84
Mechanic II
23.03
24.12
25.21 26.30
27.37
Operator II/Lab Technician
23.03
24.12
25.21 26.30
27.37

Appendix Page A1 of 4

Step 6
10 Years
17.68
21.08
22.52
23.07
24.08
24.06
24.69
25.59
0.00
25.21
26.34
27.90
27.90

Step 7
15 Years
18.01
21.49
22.95
23.52
24.54
24.53
25.18
26.09
0.00
25.69
26.84
28.44
28.44

Step 8
20 Years
18.30
21.81
23.29
23.86
24.89
24.88
25.57
26.46
0.00
26.09
27.26
28.87
28.87

AFSCME 2986
Attachment A - Pay Table
Effective July 1, 2023 - 0% move 2
Position/classification
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3 Step 4 Step 5
New Hire 6 Months 1 Year 3 Years 5 Years
Maintainer I
16.02
16.61
17.37 17.68
18.01
Recycling Attendant
19.07
19.80
20.68 21.08
21.49
Equipment Operator I
20.24
21.14
22.09 22.52
22.95
Operator I
21.14
22.09
22.63 23.07
23.52
Mechanic I
21.41
22.52
23.62 24.08
24.54
Equipment Operator II
21.85
22.74
23.60 24.06
24.53
Compost Foreman
22.70
23.33
24.22 24.69
25.18
Equipment Operator III
23.13
24.22
25.11 25.59
26.09
Equipment Operator III - Sewer 23.63
24.72
25.61 26.09
26.59
Lab Technician
23.63
24.13
24.73 25.21
25.69
Operator II
24.12
25.21
25.84 26.34
26.84
Mechanic II
25.21
26.30
27.37 27.90
28.44
Operator II/Lab Technician
25.21
26.30
27.37 27.90
28.44

Appendix Page A2 of 4

Step 6
10 Years
18.30
21.81
23.29
23.86
24.89
24.88
25.57
26.46
26.96
26.09
27.26
28.87
28.87

Step 7
15 Years
18.76
22.36
23.87
24.46
25.51
25.50
26.21
27.12
27.62
26.74
27.94
29.59
29.59

Step 8
20 Years
19.23
22.91
24.47
25.07
26.15
26.14
26.86
27.80
28.30
27.41
28.64
30.33
30.33

AFSCME 2986
Attachment A - Pay Table
Effective July 1, 2024 - 3% move 1
Position/classification
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3 Step 4 Step 5
New Hire 6 Months 1 Year 3 Years 5 Years
Maintainer I
17.11
17.89
18.21 18.55
18.85
Recycling Attendant
20.39
21.30
21.71 22.13
22.46
Equipment Operator I
21.77
22.75
23.20 23.64
23.99
Operator I
22.75
23.31
23.76 24.23
24.58
Mechanic I
23.20
24.33
24.80 25.28
25.64
Equipment Operator II
23.42
24.31
24.78 25.27
25.63
Compost Foreman
24.03
24.95
25.43 25.94
26.34
Equipment Operator III
24.95
25.86
26.36 26.87
27.25
Equipment Operator III - Sewer 25.46
26.38
26.87 27.39
27.77
Lab Technician
24.85
25.47
25.97 26.46
26.87
Operator II
25.97
26.62
27.13 27.65
28.08
Mechanic II
27.09
28.19
28.74 29.29
29.74
Operator II/Lab Technician
27.09
28.19
28.74 29.29
29.74

Appendix Page A3 of 4

Step 6
10 Years
19.32
23.03
24.59
25.19
26.28
26.27
27.00
27.94
28.45
27.54
28.78
30.48
30.48

Step 7
15 Years
19.80
23.60
25.20
25.82
26.93
26.92
27.67
28.63
29.15
28.23
29.50
31.24
31.24

Step 8
20 Years
20.40
24.31
25.96
26.59
27.74
27.73
28.50
29.49
30.02
29.08
30.38
32.18
32.18

AFSCME 2986
Attachment A - Pay Table
Effective July 1, 2025 - 3%
Position/classification
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3 Step 4
New Hire 6 Months 1 Year 3 Years
Maintainer I
17.62
18.43
18.76 19.11
Recycling Attendant
21.01
21.94
22.36 22.80
Equipment Operator I
22.43
23.44
23.89 24.35
Operator I
23.44
24.01
24.47 24.95
Mechanic I
23.89
25.06
25.55 26.03
Equipment Operator II
24.12
25.04
25.53 26.02
Compost Foreman
24.75
25.69
26.19 26.71
Equipment Operator III
25.69
26.64
27.15 27.68
Equipment Operator III - Sewer 26.23
27.17
27.68 28.21
Lab Technician
25.60
26.24
26.75 27.25
Operator II
26.75
27.41
27.94 28.47
Mechanic II
27.90
29.04
29.60 30.17
Operator II/Lab Technician
27.90
29.04
29.60 30.17

Step 5
5 Years
19.41
23.14
24.71
25.31
26.41
26.40
27.13
28.07
28.60
27.68
28.92
30.63
30.63

Appendix Page A4 of 4

Step 6
10 Years
19.90
23.72
25.33
25.95
27.07
27.06
27.81
28.77
29.30
28.37
29.64
31.39
31.39

Step 7
15 Years
20.40
24.31
25.96
26.59
27.74
27.73
28.50
29.49
30.02
29.08
30.38
32.18
32.18

Step 8
20 Years
21.01
25.04
26.74
27.39
28.57
28.56
29.36
30.38
30.92
29.95
31.30
33.14
33.14
