•

AGREEMENT
By and between the

BINGHAMTON CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
And

CSEA, Local 1000 AFSCME, AFL-CIO
Aides and Monitors Unit 6157-02
Broome County Educational Local 866

July 1, 2022 - June 30, 2025

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Agreement .......................•.......•..•...................•...............•.......................3
Article l

Pream.ble. ..•.••.....•..••.....••....•..........•••..•.•.••.•..•••••..••.........••..•••••.•..•..3
Article 2

Duration of Recogn..ition.....................•..•....•.•••.•..•....•.•.......•..........•.•.. 3
Article 3
Management Righ.ts..•.••....•••.•.•••••••.•...••...••••.••••..••...•••.••..••.•.•......••••• 4
Article 4
Compensation.................................................................................. 5
Article 5
Lateral Transfers•.............•.....•.........••....................•..•.....••.•.....•....• 7
Article 6
Personal Business Leaves and Holidays.................................................7
Article 7
Sickn.ess and Injuries••.••••••••••••••••••••••••.•••.•.•..•••••••••••••••••••••••••••.••••••• 8

Article 8
Leaves of Absence•.........•.•........•••.....••..•••••......•.••..•.•.••••.••......••..... JO

Article 9
Health, Dental and Pension Insurance................................................. 10
Article 10
Labor Management Committee......................................................... 17
Article 11

Grievan.ces...............••..................................•••.......•..................... J 8
Article 12
Employment Security'....•.......•...............••..........•...............•............ 19
Article 13
Effective Date•.••....••..••.••..••.••.•.•......•.•.•••.••••...•.•....•.•..••.•..••.•.•••.•• 20
Appendix. .•.•......•.....•..........................•...................•.....•.......•.............. 21

IBIS AGREEMENT made this fifth day of May. 2016, by and between THE CNIL
SERVICE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, INC. LOCAL 1000, AMERICAN FEDERATION OF
STATE, COUNTY, AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO, BINGHAMTON CITY
SCHOOL DISTRICT UNIT OF AIDES AND MONITORS WHO WORK FOUR HOURS OR
MORE PER DAY, BROOME COUNTY EDUCATIONAL LOCAL 866, UNIT 6157-02, herein
refelTed to as the "Association" and THE CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT OF THE CITY OF
BINGHAMTON, NEW YORK, herein referred to as the "School District" and,
WHEREAS, both parties desire to enter into this Agreement pursuant to Article 14 of the
Civil Service Law,
NOW THEREFORE, the Association and the School District mutually agree as follows:
ARTICLE 1 - PREAMBLE
Both parties to this agreement affirm that public employment is to be regarded as a career,
and that as such, the terms, conditions shall be of the caliber to attract and maintain in
employment v.rith the school district the best personnel available. Both parties further affirm
that each non-teaching school district employee, in whatever capacity he or she serves the
school district, shall at all times be a dedicated, courteous, and efficient representative of
public employment, who fully realizes that he or she is under the constant scrutiny of the
public at large and that he or she is performing an essential public service.
ARTICLE 2 - DURATION OF RECOGNITION.
Section I.
In accord v.rith Section 208 of the Civil Service Law, the Association shall have
unchallenged representation status for the period permitted by law on the date of
execution of this Agreement.
Section 2:
The Board of Education recognizes the Binghamton City School District Unit 615702 of the Civil Service Employees Association, Inc. for the purpose of negotiation
collectively in the determination of, and administration of, grievances arising under
the terms and conditions of employment of the non-teaching employees of the
Binghamton City School District. Titles covered under this agreement are Aides,
Monitors, School Monitor Coordinators, Handicapped Student Aides, and Library
Aides who work four hours or more per day.
Section 3:
The School District through the Business Office of the School District shall deduct
from the wages of school non-teaching employees and remit to the Civil Service
Employees Association, Inc., Box 7125 Capital Station, Albany, New York 12224,
regular membership dues for each of the non-teaching employees who have signed

3

dues-deduction authorization cards authorizing such deductions. A copy of the
check, together with a list of the names constituting each remittance shall be
furnished to the President of the Association. Deductions and remittances shall also
be made for duly authorized Civil Service Employees Association group health and
accident and/or group life insurance premiums. No solicitation of insurance by
representatives of any insurance company or member of the Association will be
permitted on School District premises during working hours.

The Association will provide the school district with legal counsel mutually selected
by the parties for any litigation which arises as a result of the Agency Fee language
contained in Article 2, Section 3 of this Agreement. Where a refund of dues is
directed by a court or appropriate administrative agency, through no fault of the
school district, the Association shall wholly and solely be responsible for any refund
together with interest.
Section 2:

No Strike Clause
The Association hereby affirms that it will not assert the right to strike against the
School District or to assist or participate in any strike against any government or
public employee (as defined in Section 201, subdivision 7 of the Civil Service Law),
or to impose any obligation to conduct, assist or participate in such a strike.

Section 3:

Extended Work Year
The District shall in its discretion have the right to require employees to work up to
and including 204 days. Any time worked beyond the 200-day calendar shall be paid
at the employee's hourly rate. Attendance at October Superintendent's conference
days is mandatory. Members will attend an additional six (6) hours of Professional
Learning at faculty meetings or during the March Superintendent's Conference day
during the course of the school year at the discretion of the district.
The Union shall have the right and opportunity to hold an orientation session with
all newly hired employees. This orientation session shall be for the purposes of
explaining the new employee's contractual rights and introducing them to the union.
The orientation will be held within thirty (3) days of the employee's hire date and
shall be during the working hours at a time agreed by the employee's immediate
supervisor, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes in duration.

ARTICLE 3 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1:
Except as validly limited by express provisions of this Agreement, the District
reserves the right to unilaterally determine the standards of selection for
employment; to direct and assign its employees; to take disciplinary action; to

4

relieve its employees from duty because oflack of work or other legitimate reasons;
to maintain the efficiency of governmental operations; to determine the methods,
means, and personnel by which its operations are to be conducted; to determine the
content ofjob classifications; to allocate positions to pay grades; to take all necessary
actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; to exercise complete control and
discretion over its organization and facilities, methods, means, and technology of
performing its work.

Section 4:

Layoff Procedures

a)

Layoff and Notification: It is understood and agreed that in the event the District
plans to lay off employees in the bargaining unit for any reason, the District will
notify the Union in writing of its plans at least one month prior to the effective date
that such action is proposed to commence. Upon notification to the Union of such
impending plans, a meeting shall be arranged between the parties within five
workdays of such notification to review the anticipated layoff and the effect it will
have on employees within the bargaining unit.

b)

Such layoff shall be accomplished by laying off, first, all employees with temporary
appointments. If further layoffs are necessary, then employees shall be laid off in the
inverse order of their seniority. Seniority shall be defined as time served as a teacher
aide and/or monitor on contract for four hours or more per day.
1. Where there is a demonstration that an employee lacks the competencies
to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position as
determined by the District in its sole discretion, the District retains
the right to retain an employee with less seniority while laying off a
more senior employee.

c)

Any employee to be laid off shall receive no less than 14 calendar days written
notice, with a copy to the Union President.

5

d)

Laid off employees shall be placed on a recall list in order of their seniority. If the
District establishes, funds and decides to refill the previous positions that were
abolished for a period of two (2) years, then the employees laid off shall be offered
positions if the following conditions are met:
1.
2.

The person is qualified to perform the work, as determined by the
District in its sole discretion.
The person must accept the District's offer of re-employment (sent to
their last known address) within three (3) weeks, and start work
within the same three (3) weeks, or the person shall be considered
resigned.

6

ARTICLE 4 - COMPENSATION:

The starting base salary shall be $14.20 or minimum wage, whichever is higher effective
7/1/2022.*

2022-2023
Teacher aides and monitors who were employed in the 2021-2022 school year and
who return shall receive an increase in base salary of $1,800 or prorated if part-time
effective July 1, 2022.
2023-2024
Teacher aides and monitors who were employed in the 2022-2023 school year and
who return shall receive an increase in base salary of $1800 or prorated if part-time
effective July 1, 2023.
2024-2025
Teacher aides and monitors who were employed in the 2023-2024 school year and
who return shall receive an increase in base salary of $1800 or prorated if part-time
effective July 1, 2023.

*Adjustment will be made to accommodate minimum wage standards for
those individuals whose hourly wage falls below the standard.
LONGEVITY
An employee who begins work prior to the first workday in February shall be eligible to receive
their longevity payment in September of the year in which they would reach the appropriate
anniversary date. An employee who starts working after the first workday in February shall receive
their longevity payment the September following the appropriate anniversary date.
As of July I, 2022 the following will be longevity payments:
LONGEVITY PAYMENTS:

5 th YEAR $600.00 ADDED TO BASE
10th YEAR $600.00 ADDED TO BASE
15 th YEAR $700.00 ADDED TO BASE
20th YEAR $700.00 ADDED TO BASE
25 th YEAR $500.00 ADDED TO BASE
30th YEAR $500.00 ADDED TO BASE

Payroll Option
Ten-month employees shall be given the option of receiving their salary in either
twenty-two or twenty-six payroll checks. The employee shall, by written exercise of
said option, notify the District of the choice on or before May 1st of each year which
election shall be for the ensuing year and shall not be subject to change.

Extra Work - Supervision
Aides or monitors who are hired for extra work to provide supervision before school,
as a monitor or after school (beyond a 6 hr. workday) as a lunch monitor will be paid
for hours worked at their contractual hourly rate of pay plus $0.50 cents per hour.
Direct Deposit
The District will provide direct payroll deposit to a single financial institution
affiliated with ACH (Automated Clearing House) for all members of the bargaining
unit. Paper checks will no longer be issued.

Job Postings
Copies of job postings for teacher aide and monitor positions shall be forwarded to
the Association President.
ARTICLE 5 -LATERAL TRANSFERS
Seniority in the respective job classifications will be considered as a factor in
determining the lateral transfers.
ARTICLE 6 - PERSONAL BUSINESS LEAVES and HOLIDAYS
Section 1: Each employee shall be allowed four (4) days per year for personal business (which days
are to be credited according to the past practices of the District, i.e., four (4) days
credited when employed and thereafter, at the commencement of each fiscal year),
which days shall at the end of the fiscal year, if not used, be converted to sick leave
days, but they shall not be accumulative as personal business days and use of a day
for personal business shall be subject to approval of the Superintendent of Schools
or his/her designee when they are to be taken for other than the following reasons:
1. Illness in immediate* family
2. Death in immediate* family - up to 3 days (in addition to 2 bereavement
days provided by district)
3. Funerals - 1 day each
4. Family or close relatives' wedding; 1 day each
5. College graduation of member of family -1 day each
6. Bank Business - (such as settling of mortgages or loans) 1 day

8

7. Court attendance where personally involved
8. Use of these four days to extend sick leave when leave has been used up
due to personal illness
9. Employee moving - 1 day
*Immediate family is defined to include: spouse, children, parents, step-parents or
stepchildren, grandparents, brothers, sisters, mother-in-law, father-in-Law, sister-in-law, brother-inlaw, aunts and uncles, nieces, nephews, grandchildren, son-in-law, daughter-in-law and a person
who regularly resides in the employee's home and occupies a close relationship to the employee.
Section 2:
Each employee shall be allowed two bereavement days for death in the immediate
family as immediate family is above defined.
Section 3:

Section 4:

If an employee is called for jucy duty, then the employee will be paid his/her normal
rate of pay for time spent on jury duty, less the amount paid by the Court as
compensation for jury duty.
,,.
All employees covered by this Agreement shall work the days called for by the
adopted school calendar and ·as determined by this school district.

Section 5:
In the event that an employee is absent from work on the day before a holiday, he
shall not be penalized holiday pay for the reason that he was absent on the day prior
to the holiday, as long as the absence is for reasons allowed wider the agreement.

ARTICLE 7 - SICKNESS AND INJURIES (SICK LEAVE, ETC.)

9

Section 1:

Section 2:

Section 3:

Section 4.

Section 5:

An employee shall accrue one ( 1) day a month sick leave and it shall be permissible
to accumulate his/her sick leave days and no limit will be imposed. If an employee
goes unpaid for more than half the work days in a month, they shall not be entitled
to an accrued sick day for that month. After an employee has completed two
consecutive full fiscal years with the District, or being a ten-month employee, has
completed two full consecutive ten-month periods within two fiscal years, such
leave for the next ensuing fiscal or ten-month period will be credited at the beginning
of such period.
In the event that an employee has no personal business days left, the Superintendent
of Schools, upon prior approval, or upon written request from the employee, may
grant permission to use accumulated sick leave for death or illness in the immediate
family (as defined in Article 6, Section 1).
In case a non-teaching person is quarantined in his place of residence because of
illness or contagious disease caused by contact with a student or teacher in the
school, accumulative sick leave shall not be charged and salary deductions shall not
be made for the duration of the quarantine or such other period as the School Doctor
shall certify as requisite or prudent.
The School District will reimburse employees for loss or damage to personal
property such as eyeglasses, dentures, hearing aids, while the employee is acting in
the discharge of his/her duties within the scope of his/her employment. Terms and
conditions of payment will be subject to approval of the Superintendent of Schools
or his designee.
Attendance Incentive
Aides or Monitors who use no sick day during the school year will be paid five
hundred dollars ($500.00) the following December.
Aides or Monitors who use one (1) sick day during the school year will be paid four
hundred dollars ($400.00) the following December.
Aides or Monitors who use two (2) sick days during the school year will be paid
three hundred dollars ($300.00) the following December.
Bereavement days, personal business days, days for Jury Duty and days contributed
to sick bank do not count against perfect attendance.

Section 6:

After having served two (2) consecutive years in full time service to the district,
Aides or Monitors members may participate in a Sick Leave Bank provided they
contribute sick days to the sick bank prior to September 1 5 th of each year and
midyear hires within two months of hire date. An aide or monitor may draw from
the Sick Leave Bank provided:

10

1. They have exhausted their own sick days and personal days. A sick leave
applicant who has exhausted all their sick and personal days may request
from the Superintendent of Schools additional leave to conduct personal
business that may come up prior to the end of the school year. Such requests
shall not be unreasonably denied.
2. They have furnished a physician's statement in writing demonstrating the
need for additional sick leave and,
3. The Sick Leave Bank Screening Committee approves the application.
Any aide or monitor employee participating in the Sick Leave Bank will be limited
to withdrawing from the bank up to a total of sixty (60) days in succession. When
an illness extends beyond sixty days, the employee may reapply to the Screening
Committee for further coverage. There will be a maximum of 180 days available
over a two (2) year period.
The Sick Leave Bank Screening Committee shall consist of three District appointees
and two Aides or Monitor appointees. Decisions of said committee shall not be
subject to the grievance procedure.
The District shall contribute one hundred (100 days to the bank for the 2022-2023,
2023-2024. 2024-2025 school year and will replenish all part of these days whenever
the bargaining unit members' contributed days have been exhausted.
The bargaining unit shall not be allowed to annually contribute more days than a
number derived by multiplying the number of bargaining unit members by two.
In the event of emergencies which require additional sick days beyond those granted
in this contract, the Board may, upon application of the employee, grant sick leave
extension at full pay.
Donation of a day to Sick Bank does not exclude members from receiving Perfect
Attendance.
Section 7: In the event of emergencies or extended illness which requires additional sick days
beyond those granted in this contract, the Board of Education may, upon written
application of the non-teaching employee, grant a sick leave extension, not to exceed
80 working days at full pay. This privilege is specifically restricted and limited to
Civil Service Employees who have completed three or more consecutive years of
service in the City School District. For the purposes of the foregoing paragraph, a
year's service is an employee's normal work year, so that a ten-month employee
completes a year of service in ten months and a twelve-month employee, in twelve
months. An unpaid leave of absence is not to be construed as a break in service, but

11

the period of the leave is not credited towards the three-year qualification period. A
voluntary termination is a break in service and upon rehiring; an employee must requalify with three years of consecutive service. A layoff is not a break in service
provided the employee is rehired within a year, although no credit for the time
furloughed will be given. A disciplinary discharge resulting in termination breaks
service, but a suspension is not a break in service, although the period of suspension
is not credited. Discretionary leave means it shall be granted ·at the sole discretion of
the Board of Education.
ARTICLE 8 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 1:
A short term leave of absence without pay of up to ten (10) days may be applied for
by an employee. The leave shall be granted or denied in the sole discretion of the
District. The employee must apply for said leave at least ten (10) days in advance
unless a bona fide, good faith, emergency reason exists for not having applied upon
ten-(10) days notice. A person granted a short-term leave of absence shall not be
allowed another short-term leave of absence for the following two (2) academic
years.
Section 2:

A long term leave of absence without pay if not less than ten (10) days or more than
one ( 1) year may be applied for by an employee. The leave shall be granted or denied
in the sole discretion of the District. The employee must apply for said leave at least
thirty (30) days in advance unless a bona fide, good faith, emergency reason exists
for not having applied upon thirty (30) days notice.

ARTICLE 9 - HEAL TH, DENTAL and PENSION INSURANCE
Those hired after 7/1/2013 will only have the option of the PPO plan for their insurance coverage.
Health Benefits
Section 1: Effective as soon as possible after July 1, 2013, the District shall only make
available to all new unit members one health insurance plan - Excellus Blue
PPO-H.

12

Prescription medications shall carry the following co-pays:
All Plans Effective July I, 2022
Tier
I

Five dollars $5.00

Tier

Fifteen dollars $15.00

2
Tier
3

Thirty dollars $30.00

Effective after July I, 2010, the District shall make available
to all unit members two (2) health insurance plans.
Plan I: Blue Cross Blue Shield of Central New York Region
wide Plan Option 11
Section 2: This health insurance plan is the indemnity plan
offered since January 1, 1999. There are to be no changes to
existing language for this plan.
Plan II: Blue Cross Blue Shield of Central New York Region
wide Blue PPO-Plan H (see attached Appendix).
Any employee who is eligible for membership in the Blue
Cross/Blue Shield Region Wide Plan, Option 2, may become
a member of said plan and the insurance premiums of the
persons currently employed by the District and eligible
dependents shall be paid by the School District. Any teacher
aides and monitors hired after March S, 1985, shall contribute
twelve percent (12%) of the annual cost.
The District shall have the right to change the health insurance
plan administrator provided that plan benefits are comparable
Section to that provided by the Blue Cross/Blue Shield Region wide
3:
Plan, Option 2 health insurance.

13

In order to assist the District in cost saving measures in the area of health insurance, the Association
agrees that:
A)

Support Staff will endeavor to reduce prescription costs by mail order
purchases where said prescription will require long-term usage of a
medication. The District shall provide sources, current prices, and lists of
available medications by mail order to the Support Staff.

B)

Where an employee plans to submit to elective surgery, the District shall
have the right to require a second opinion, provided the District pays the cost.

C)

The District shall have the right to require that the plan administrator shall
audit all hospital and physician's bills.

D)

The District may establish an employee education program for the purpose
of making Support Staff aware of insurance benefits and costs. Said program
may include an annual summary of charges incurred by each employee, but
individual employee's names will not appear on any summary to be
publicized in such a program.

E)

The District and Association agree to comply with all state and federal laws
concerning generic drugs.

F)

The parties agree to participate with a preferred provider for health services
for employees covered by this Agreement. Employees so covered, shall
maintain the right to determine the health services provider of their choice
without penalty.

1)

The annual major medical deductibles shall be as follows:
Effective
Date
7/1/2010

Individual
Coverage
$ 50

14

Family
Coverage
$150

J)

The payments of benefits as described in the District's medical benefits plan
will be made as determined based on the submission of proof that a charge,
fee or expense has been incurred. Payment of covered hospital inpatient
charges will be made by a two-party check payable to the hospital and the
covered person, or parent or guardian of the covered person if the covered
person is a minor or mentally or physically totally disabled. The payment
check will be sent to the individual payee to be endorsed and forwarded to
the hospital. Payment of benefits to other service providers may be made
directly to the service provider. However, any reimbursement by the plan for
a charge, fee or expense paid by an individual will be disbursed to that
individual who paid the charge, fee or expense.

K)

Right of Reimbursement and Assignment of Proceeds The term "third party"
means a person or organization other than the covered person. No benefits
shall be paid under any coverage of this plan with respect to any injury or
sickness for which a third party may be liable or legally responsible.
However, subject to the provisions of this section, the plan will pay such
benefits provided that the covered person (or his or her legally authorized
parent, guardian, or representative) shall comply with the following
conditions:

1.

Prior to payment of any such benefits under this plan, the covered
person and the legal representative of the covered person shall agree,
in writing, to provide the claims administrator and the fund
administrator with written notice whenever a claim is commenced
against and/or recovery is received from any third party (or insurer
or surety thereof) for damages as a result of the injury or sickness;

2.

Prior to the payment of any such benefits under this plan, the covered
person and the legal representative of the covered person shall agree,
in writing, to reimburse the plan in accordance with this section for
any benefits paid by the plan on account of such injury or sickness;
and

3.

Prior to payment of any such benefits under this plan, the covered
person and the legal representative of the covered person shall
provide in writing, an assignment of proceeds in favor of the plan in
the amount of any benefits paid by the plan on account of such injury
or sickness; such assignment to be valid against any judgment,
settlement, or recovery in any manner received from such third party
or such third party's insurer or surety.

15

The conditions herein set forth shall not apply to any benefits payable under
Medicare supplementary coverage, nor to any amount received by the
covered person under any other insurance policy or certificate issued to the
covered person or to any dependent of an employee covered hereunder.
The amounts to be recovered by the plan pursuant to the provisions thereof
shall not be reduced by any attorney's fees, court costs or other
disbursements.
L)

The Binghamton City School District shall provide a flexible cafeteria plan
pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 125 which shall be used for
purposes of the payment by employees of health care premium equivalents,
uncovered health care expenses, uncovered dental expenses, child care
expenses, optical care and other uncovered medical and/or health expenses
as permitted by regulations of the Internal Revenue Service. It is understood
that this flexible spending account/cafeteria plan shall allow the employee to
pay these expenses with pre-tax dollars. The initial startup cost of this plan
shall be paid by the Binghamton City School District. Any monthly expense
or administration fee for belonging to or participating in said plan shall be
paid for by the employee by payroll deduction. This plan shall only be
offered so long as it is permitted by the Internal Revenue Code and Internal
Revenue Service Regulations.

M)

There shall be established a health benefits committee consisting of members
appointed by the association, and members appointed by other bargaining
units and by the district. The goal of this committee shall be to establish and
maintain a managed health care benefit system. The charge of this committee
is to investigate ways to contain and reduce health care costs.

N)

Inpatient admissions for Alcoholism and Substance Abuse shall be limited
to two (2) continuous periods of confinement as a lifetime maximum.

0)

Inpatient Mental Illness and Nervous Disorder Care shall be covered under
Major Medical.

P)

There shall be a lifetime infertility benefit limit of $10,000.00 per covered
participant.

Q)

For equipment or supplies costing $100.00 or more, benefits must be
precertified by the Plan's Case Management Agency in order to be covered
at 80%. If not certified, coverage would be limited to 50%. Charges would
continue to be subject to the Plan's Major Medical deductible.

16

R)

Section 4:

Effective July I, 1997, physician services provided by a non-participating
provider shall be covered under the Major Medical portion of the plan,
subject to the deductible and co-payment.

S)Jn order for a covered participant to obtain reimbursement or payment for charges
for services and supplies that are medically necessary and are usual,
customary and reasonable, and are covered charges eligible for benefits
under this plan, a pre-admission certification and pre-service authorization
must be obtained from the plan's case management consultant. Payment of
covered hospital expenses incurred by covered persons who fail to obtain
pre-admission certification will be reduced by $100. 00 of the amount of the
covered hospital expense that the plan would otherwise pay.
For all persons employed by the Binghamton City School District, within this Unit,
hired prior to March 5, 1985, a non-contributory dental plan shall continue to be
provided by the School District for the employee and eligible dependents.
Any employee hired on or after March 5, 1985, shall be required to contribute twelve
percent (12%) of the annual premium or equivalent for the individual and/or family
coverage provided by this plan.

Section 5:
The Employer agrees to make a Non-elective Contribution for eligible unit members.
Such contribution will be made to a 403 (b) program able to accept Employer
contributions as defined in the Internal Revenue Code. This contribution will be
processed within thirty (30) days of retirement.
No Cash Option No Employee may receive cash in lieu of or as an alternative to any of the Employer's
Non-elective Contribution(s) except as described herein. (See paragraph 4.A.)
Contribution Limitations -

In any applicable year, the maximum Employer contribution shall not cause an
Employee's 403(b) account to exceed the applicable contribution limit under Section
415(c)(l) of the Code, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases. For Employer Nonelective Contributions made post-employment to former Employees' 403(b)
account, the Contribution Limit shall be based on the Employee's compensation, as
determined under Section 403(b)(3) of the Code and in any event, no Employee after
the fifth taxable year following the taxable year in which that Employee terminated
employment.
In the event that the calculation of the Employer Non-elective Contribution
referenced in any of the preceding paragraphs exceed the applicable contribution
limits, the excess amount shall be handled by the Employer as follows:

17

A.

For all members in the New York State Employees' Retirement System
regardless of their membership date, the Employer shall first make an Employer
Non-elective Contribution up to the Contribution Limit of the Internal Revenue
Code and then pay any excess amount as compensation directly to the
Employee. In no instance shall the Employee have any rights to, including the
ability to receive, any excess amount as compensation unless and until the
Contribution Limit of the Internal Revenue Code are fully met through payment
of the Employer's Non-elective Contribution; and

B.

For all members in the New York State Employees' Retirement System
regardless of their membership date, the Employer shall first make an Employer
Non-elective Contribution up to the Contribution Limit of the Internal Revenue
Code. To the extent that the Employer Non-elective Contribution exceeds the
Contribution Limit, such excess shall be reallocated to the Employee the
following year as an Employer Non-elective Contribution (which contribution
shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted under the Code), and in
January of the following year for up to four (4) years after the year of the
Employee's employment severance, until such time as the Employer Nonelective Contribution is fully deposited into the Employee's 403 (b) amount. In
no case shall the Employer Non-elective Contribution exceed the Contribution
Limit of the Internal Revenue Code.
403 (b) Accounts Employees receiving a contribution according to this Article shall be required
to select a 403 (b) account designated to accept Employer Non-elective
Contributions. Employer contributions shall be deposited into the
403(b)account selected by the Employee.

18

ARTICLE 10 - LABOR]MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
Section 1..

Section 2:

In order to promote harmonious and cooperative relations between District
administrators, supervisors, teachers, and support staff, the District recognizes the
right of Aides and Monitors represented by the Association to request monthly
meetings with an administration representative provided, however, that at least three
(3) days written notice is forwarded to him/her. In the event of an emergency, this
provision may be waived, at the discretion of the administration representative.
The need for training for aides and monitors is recognized. A training fund of$3,000
per year will be established.
The Committee will be composed of an equal number of CSEA representatives and
representatives of the Binghamton City School District. The number of
representatives will be established by the Committee. This Committee will
recommend to the Superintendent of Schools areas in which training should be given
and administer the fund in accordance with the District's accounting procedures.
These funds shall not rollover from year to year; and, if unused, will revert to the
District's general fund.

Section 3:

Tuition Reimbursement
The District shall establish a Tuition Reimbursement Fund of up to seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7,500) each year for the purpose of reimbursing the tuition
paid by teacher aides and monitors for college credit courses completed by the same
teacher aides and monitors. The maximum amount reimbursed shall be fifty dollars
($50) per approved and earned college credit hour. The maximum amount
reimbursed annually to teacher aides and monitors depends on the total amount of
the college credit hours completed each year. The maximum amount paid to the
teacher aides and monitors will be determined by the total number of college credit
hoW'S completed by the total bargaining unit.
College courses must be in teacher preparation courses and/or courses relevant to
the teacher aide and monitor jobs. All courses to be considered for reimbursement
shall have prior approval of the Superintendent of Schools or his/her designee.
Forms, timelines and procedures for implementing the Tuition Reimbursement Fund
shall be mutually developed and distributed to all teacher aides and monitors by the
Parties.

Section 4:

Union Business
The President or another CSEA official designated by the President and one delegate
shall be given four ( 4) days off a year with pay to attend meetings or conventions of
the Civil Service Employees Association. In addition, thereto, each is allotted a

19

maximum of four (4) additional days off with pay in the event of special meetings.
Notice of intention to attend meetings shall be presented in advance for approval by
the Board of Education. Advance notice of intention to attend meetings or
conventions will include a description of the purpose of the meetings or conventions.
ARTICLE 11 - GRIEVANCES
Section 1:
a. Definition
(1)

Employer - Board of Education, Binghamton City School District,
City of Binghamton, New York.

(2)

Employee - any person covered by this collective bargaining
agreement.

(3)

Employee's Representative - any person selected by an employee
to represent him/her in formal grievance procedure.

(4)

Grievance - complaint by an employee that there has been as to him
or her violation or misinterpretation of this agreement or complaint
by the Association that there has been a violation or misinterpretation
of this agreement affecting a covered employee or employees.

b. Procedures
( 1)

Informal - Stage I: The employee shall present his or her grievance
to his or her immediate supervisor, having district-wide
responsibility either directly or through the employee's
representative. If the grievance is not resolved at Stage I within a
period of fifteen (15) workdays after presentation informally, the
employee may initiate action to implement Stage IL

(2)

Formal-Stage II: The employee may initiate Stage II by filing with
the Superintendent of Schools within two school days after the lapse
of the fifteen days for informal resolution a written statement of
grievance. The statement shall contain a clear, concise statement of
the alleged violation or misinterpretation, the section of the contract
relied upon and the redress to which the employee believes he or she
may be entitled. The Superintendent shall within three school days
after the receipt of the formal grievance convene a formal hearing at
which time evidence may be presented to the Superintendent or a
hearing officer designated by the Superintendent. A decision shall be

20

rendered within three school days after the hearing. If the grievance
is not resolved at Stage Il, the employee may within three school days
after a decision at Stage II initiate Stage Ill.
(3)

Formal Stage Ill: The employee shall present the grievance to the
Board of Education by filing with the Clerk of the Board a written
statement of initiation of Stage Ill to which shall be attached the
statement of grievance presented at Stage IL The Board of Education
shall within seven school days after receipt of the statement initiating
Stage Ill convene a formal hearing at which time evidence may be
presented to the Board or a member or members of the Board
designated hearing officer. A written decision will be rendered within
seven school days after the aforementioned hearing. The decision of
the Board of Education shall be final and binding without recourse to
arbitration.

c. Miscellaneous
(I)

No grievance shall be entertained pursuant to the aforesaid provisions
unless the grievance is presented at Stage I within 30 calendar days
after the occurrence of the alleged violation or misinterpretation.

ARTICLE 12-EMPLOYMENT SECURITY
Section 1 : All employees in the non-competitive or labor class shall be afforded the full protection
of Section 75 of the State Civil Service Law as it relates to suspension, demotion,
discharge or formal reprimand, after five (5) years of continuous service measured
from the date of last entry into District service.
ARTICLE 13 - Effective Date
This Agreement shall become effective July 1, 2021 and shall terminate at the close
of business on June 30, 2025.
THE CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT OF
DISTRICTNEGOTIATIONTEAM
THE
Eric Wilson
Dawne Anna-Adams
CITY OF BINGHAMTON, NEW YORK

a:rM~
Superintendent of Schoo ls

CSEA NEGOTIATION TEAM
Nicole Strawn
Vicki McMurray
Tammy Schyndler
TinaZdimal
TI-E CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES
ASSOCIATION, NC. LOCAL 1000,
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE
COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL

21

EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO
BROOME
COUNTY EDUCATIONAL LOCAL 866

Civil Seivice Employees Association, Inc.
Local 1000 AFSCME, AFL-CIO

8y_U7?ha

UNIT 6157-02

Christopher Rohde
Labor Relations Specialist

By Tina Zdimal
CSEA Unit President

22

Excellus +. I
Comparison of benefits for Binghamton City Schools

5/3J2013

Plan features
Primary Care Physician (PCP)

• Not required

Referrab
Out of network benefits
Out of area benefits

• Not required
• Ccwered
• Coverage provided worldwide through lhe BlueCard program.

Student/Oopandent CO'lerage

• Qval~ied ck!pendents and students are covered to -

• Ooml!Stic panner
• Coverage Period

26.

• Not covered
• J,muary t st - December 31st

• Ho r:vpay, oflltt vlslt covered subject
10 dcductlblt Mid colosurance
• Not requited

• Cc>ven!d

• Cooml9C! prwidtd wo,ldwidc
tluougl\ Ille BlutCud P,09/M\.
. ~ ~ l ! a n d students
l~<Offllldloq26•
,No!Wtmd

Plan coat-11harin11 highlights

N

w

• Office visit copay (Primary Care Physician)

, S10 copay

• Office vt.lt copay (Speclallsl)

• $10copoy

.. Coinsurance

• ln"{letwcrk: None; Out-of-<1etvvark.: 20%

• No c~,_~lf'~vl1ll~ subject
lo cled'ucn111e and cclru'11rance
, No copay, office visit Wtlled subject
lo cled'11<Ul!lt and coll'dUtanu
, 2014, enhanced bene!lu only. uni...

Deductible

• ln-<1etwork: None Out of Network S250 Individual ~750 family

Out of pocket mlll(imum

• In-network: None: Out of Netwo<I: fl.000 indMduaJ ~3,000 family

• Lifetime rnaximum

, None

llOted
• Va,lel. Oependill9 on Unit.
En~~iUonlv
• S400 MMdull / S1200 family•
~~btnefnson1'f
• None

Wellness Jncenlive
, Stay healthy with great programs and inlEfltivesl

• 8111<!365 • Takc.idv.intageol etd1111Ye
dis<.oun11 on·l!Hhh and Wl:!lnffl p1oduc;1s
and lffiket. w.riudlng rl\llffl. eltffCM,
nutrition, ~C!Nc piocedures and he~fin9
,ids.

• Btu,,365 - Talle ldv.. i.go al omusm
dll<ounts on he.11th ~ wtllnus piodUCl1
i n d ~ ll'ICludlng fllneu. -*·
nutrition, elecU,,c ptlXtclures and hearin<J

ald1..

• 1lh1d6S • TakudVi!ltaga ol
CWlaiYe dls<OUIIIS OIi he,l(lh and
wellnKs P!O(lu(lS a n d ~
loduding n-. ~
-null~/
tlKI~ p,ocrdurcs tnd huring - .

• Coreiw In lull
• C<11t1ed In full r0t 1 eum P'!f yo,ar
~cc.ording lo netlooal ouidellncs
• Comedln(IJII

• Ccwe<td lo luff
• C<Mftil at 60%. subject mthe dedUCllbfe

• CDVered in full
• Covered ln fun for 1 ellam per y,,,,.r

, NolCOY'°'~

• Cowied In full

Preven.tive Health Care SelVl.cee
• WeU child visits
• Adult routine physical exams

• Adult immunizations

for ont roulino, eum po, year

Excellus +. ~
Comparison of benefits for Binghamton City Schools

Mammography
Pap smear
Routine GYN eum
Prostate cancer screening

Routine vision
Colonoscopy

5/3/2013

• Co11ered in fuD
• Covered in futt
• Covered in full
, $10 copay
• S10 copay for one routine exam per year

• Co,ro;red at 80%, sub: t to the deductible
• Co,ered at 80%, sub t to the dedl.tc\lble
• Cewted at80%, wbjectto the deductible
• Co,Ofod at 110%, 5W>J1ct to tho deductible
• C-'11 at 80%, subjrct to the deductible

• Pruentive and dl11g-tk<<Wt'led
according to the su19lal ~.nt

• C...nred al 8G'l'o, sub

• $10 copay pervisit

lor OIIO IOU!ine

-irraar

t o Iha deducUble

Physldan Office Services
• Diagnostic office visits

N

~

, CDYl!red in full
• Co>1ered in full
• Covered in full
• Covered in full
• Not covered
• CoYered in NII

I·

.m=f

• Covered at 80%, subject to the deductible

• Dlagnostk x-rays
• DiollClostlc laboratory and pathology
, Allergy t~ ts

• Coveled In full
• S1Ocopay per visit

• Covered at BO%, subject to Iha deductible
• Covered at SD%. subject to the deductible

• Allergy lnje.c\ions

• Covered in lull

, Covell!d at SO%, subject to the deductible

• Chcrnothe<~
, Radiation lhl'lapy

• Covered m full
• Covered In lull

, Coveted at 80%, subject 1o the deducti>le
• Cavered at 80%. sublect to the deducllble

, Covered in lull
, Subject to dedUC1ible aad
coinsurance
, Sub)Kt to deductible and
colnsuran<~
• c-red In full
, covered In run

1· Covered io full

, Covered at 80%, subie<t to the deductible
, Cove,ed at 80%, ,ubje,ct to the deductible

1·• Covered
in full
Covered in full

, Covered at 80%, subject to lhe deductible

, Covered in full

Af~~;~lcation applles for MRI,

Su!>Ject to deductible and

comurance

• C-red •t 80%, subject to thc,dedU<tible. • Covered in full
l'rectni!lc;ition ~I'S to M~I. PfT .and CAT

scans.

Maternity Services
• Prenatal Care
• Hospital ca"' for mom llnclt!ding delr,,eryl
• Newborn nursery care

Prescription Drug
• Short•term and maintenan<e drugs
• Short-te1m and maintenance drugs

Inpatient Hospital Benefits
Hospital ben1fits
Physician vi,lts in the hospital

• F~~ry:~~ to ~SOc~or
.ldlnbilon
cian: COlll•td fuU
, COY1!tod In I

I·

• Not ce>1ered

SSIS15/$30

I.·=In~·

Su~jo<'l lo S250 Cop"!' per admission for

Puxertilication applies.

• C ~ •t 80%, subjlict to the deductible.

Pr««llllcallon applies.

• CcmRd 1180%, subject to ti,., deductible

I , Tier 1 - $3, lier 2 - $5 Tier 3 • S20

I.

Covered in lull, Unlimited Days

, Covered in ful~ day limits may appf/

Excellus +.f.
Comparison of benefits for Binghamton City Schools

, Inpatient pl\l'Sic•I R!habH~ation

5/3/2013

I• ~« to siso <or,ipu ildmlnion lo, up • c-...1 &1 80%, •Joel 1o 11w ~litt
~~r> per)'Olil.

~\t."° 60 cll'j'$Pff ~ 1. 1\'to!nif,c•tlon ·=~~~~:,~
P• ~.,. S!,l,le<l 11> no dcducl,ble
....s cdM<ifa11ai a1,..- !>$C boner,,.

~

hav• "'haurtcd lor unnmlted d•p
• Covff'ed In fun
, Ccwezed in fub

, c.,.....ed in fuU
• COllerorl In fun

• Covered at 80%, subject ID tho dedU(\iblo
, Covered al 80%. subject to the deductibl<!

, SSO copay per vblt, uole.,adf11itted within
24 hour>
• S25 «>?'Y per visit

, fS0 o,p,y p0< v~rt. unles< admlt14d wllhln 1· Covered in full

• f~landlng urgent CBre center

• CowOfed •t 80%, subjtcl to the dodu<l(ble

• Ambulance

.J1Deopoy

. i,o <Oi>"Y

, CCNered in luU
• Covered in fuU

• Diagnostic x-rays

• f ~ O ~ ~,M~~ic,~on applies
, Covered In full

• Co,c,ocl II eel%. !Olbjact to lht ck4u<llblc.
1'11U11illcatlon "91)10> lo MRI. fET >nd CAT
sans
, c°"'red •1 so,i,, su~ to tho c!oductible
, Covered at 80%, su tl to thetkdutti>I•
• C""ered a.t 80%, subjoel to tht deductible
• COWied II 80%, subje<I to the dcduc,i>lu

, Covered in full

• Oi•i,,c1tlc laboratory and pathology
• S1K9IG! care
• Ct.fmothtr.1py
• Rad1allon lherapy

, 5urge,y
• Anuthesla

Emergency Cue

• Emergency room care

2Ch0111l

Outpatient Hospital Benafitll

N

Vl

: ~!~full
, Co,ered In fuH

• CCNered In fuU
• Covered in full
• Coye.red in fuD
, Caverod in lull

Mental Health and Chemical Dependence
• Inpatient mental he-atth care
.. Oulpallenl mental hNlth care

• Inpatient chemical depend<nce
• Outpatient chemical dependence

·~i:pae:.~s~t

· = toSZSClc.~ , 1 ~ 1 0 r
~
l«t darp. f'rttt
•llon ,wllos.
• 110 <opoy P« ~

• c.,..,cd at ao~. Mllljo(t to the dcdu<liblo,
f'locffllflgjion appl",ti.
, Co,~
t~,..s..noblo.
SeMct< un bCI pc
fn •n Olllplllilnl
rocaiy or In• p,<Mdilr offitt.
• Covo,~t~, l\bJ«l10\llo~.
Pr.urli •lion~.
, Coimd ll 80~, lul,j«, 10 Uw dtduclllllit

, $10 copay for up lo a 30 day supply

. C-.6 aL 80%, ~ject ta the deducttble

. 110=·
ou1pol

· C6/lbe

\nan

I lodilyot In'. ~ offlc~.

6180"·::tJ:·to

Other Services
• Oia.b•ttc insutin ilnd supplles

1.. up lo a 30 doy lllpply

• C°""red in lull, unlimilod days
• Same a, Office v-~~ Benefit

• ccw.,ed r, full. unlim~ed days
• Covered in full

I.

Covered in Full

Excell.us+.~
Comparison of benefits for Binghamton City Schools

• Skilled nursing facility

• Subjc~ 10 ~ copay w ~mission for up , COlertd at 80%, subjlct to Ill~ dcduclible
to 120 days per y,.r. Precerliflc.ttlon
lo, up to 45 days per year. Prea:ttift<tllon
applies.
appl~.

• Homecare

• Coveted In full for uolimiled visits.
Prccenn,ratlon app!lts.

, C<M!ttd et 60",6, , . . l ll> a .$SO
dedudible lot u"lfmllocl visils par year,
lffurtlllcallon appl!fs.

in full for unlimited days
, (av,,,cd •180"4, 11A!~ ID lh• deduttlble
lor 111ttmiled-.llslisp«year
• COl'\!rtd at 80%, ,i.,je_ct to lhc dedvctlM • Subject to ~clible ·and 20".4
~olrisur1n<e, unlm1Led visits
for• c:omblried totll of 4S <mlts p« yNr
for plrysiclt •Pfflll, -upallonil and
raipn~ lhgqPI'
• C~
lit 80%, 1Ub)e<t io Iha !Mduccibr.. • Subject1a deductible and 20%
aiiosurana,
Prt<et1lllc.,llon •ppllti.
• Covoced ot 80%, sub}cd io lhe deductlble , Sub}Kt to dei!Utllble and 20%
calrisuran~
• COYered at 80%, subject 1o the deducllble , ~~:~eductible and 20%

:r:
~

e:g
0. 0:,

c:, -·
n ::::i
;?. ~
tT1 I!?.

Hospice

, Covered in full lor unfimited days

Outpatient therapy

• S10 copayper..Wt lorup loo combined
total of 4S Yis1LSptr YH( lot p~a!.
:speech, occul)ll!Kmll and ,espira\Oly

8-. § ::::i
~ Q fj
<= "'
'<
o/ gi
tT1 g
::r
•- 3

Durable medical equipment

3

;;! ~ 8'

~ i:,

N

......'

....

-

-co
w '< -·
"(")" .,!!l.ji"
0
::I

:l.
er
<=

r::t.

0
::I
Ill

5/3/2013

,

1har1py
• Ccwett<l at 80%. Proccrtlllc.rlon oppRes.

, C011ered at BO%

Chiropractic

• S10 copay per visit

Acupun<1ure

, Nat covered
, Not covered
, S10 (09*'/ fQt .t<d dCU\141 lnlury to sound,
• Covtrtd al 80%. wbfKt to the deduclibla
natural tct lh ,1e1d lorart due to congenital foe ec:ddent.91 ln)uly to SOW1d, nacural ~lh
d<S~tMI Of 111\0IMly
•nd for CMo due lo congoniLDl dlsN\c or

, Hearing

• Routine -

not C<M>rcd

for unfimiied d'}"
• Cowlld In lull for vp to 60 visiis p«
~

. Subltd·lo cladllClib~ ond

colns1A11ce after basic benefits have
e.\hausted for up to 325 vlsiis p<!f

. r!.ire11

External prosthetics

Dental

• Covtrtd ln lu!Q for 100 days; Subject
\0 no deductible and cow-e
•fl!f basic b-'lls hboie exhausted

• norn.ly
.
, Roulinc """"'I not CO'o'fled

• Natc~ed

• Not Covered

• Not covered

Blue PPO Plan

Classic Blue Plan

Individual Plan
Total Cost
Employee Cost

$7,686.96

$8,214.72

3%
10%

$230.61
$768.70

$246.44
$821.47

12%

$922.44

$985.77

BTA

$350.00

$950.00

BASA

$750.00

$750.00

Family Plan
Total Cost
Employee Cost

$20,187.48

$21,182.16

3%
10%

$605.62
$2,018.75

$635.46
$2,118.22

12%

$2,422.50

$2,541.86

BTA

$825.00

$1,950.00

BASA

$1,800.00

$1,800.00

Dental Plan Contributions
Individual Plan
Family Plan
Total cost

$96,96

Total cost

$328.20

12%

$39.38

Employee Cost
Employee Cost
12%

$11.64

27

rendered within three school days after the hearing. If the grievance
is not resolved at Stage Il, the employee may within three school days
after a decision at Stage Il initiate Stage Ill.
(3)

Formal Stage Ill: The employee shall present the grievance to the
Board of Education by filing with the Clerk of the Board a written
statement of initiation of Stage Ill to which shall be attached the
statement of grievance presented at Stage Il. The Board of Education
shall within seven school days after receipt of the statement initiating
Stage Ill convene a formal hearing at which time evidence may be
presented to the Board or a member or members of the Board
designated hearing officer. A written decision will be rendered within
seven school days after the aforementioned hearing. The decision of
the Board of Education shall be final and binding without recourse to
arbitration.

c. Miscellaneous

(1)

No grievance shall be entertained pursuant to the aforesaid provisions
unless the grievance is presented at Stage I within 30 calendar days
after the occurrence of the alleged violation or misinterpretation.

ARTICLE 12-EMPLOYMENT SECURITY
Section 1 : All employees in the non-competitive or labor class shall be afforded the full protection
of Section 75 of the State Civil Service Law as it relates to suspension, demotion,
discharge or formal reprimand, after five (5) years of continuous service measured
from the date of last entry into District service.
ARTICLE 13 - Effective Date
This Agreement shall become effective July 1, 2021 and shall terminate at the close
of business on June 30, 2025.
THE CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT OF
DISTRICT NEGOTIATION TEAM
THE
Eric Wilson
Dawne Anna-Adams
CITY OF BINGHAMTON, NEW YORK
CSEA NEGOT£ATI0N TEAM
Nicole Strawn
Vicki McMurray
Tammy Schyndler
TinaZdimal
TI-E CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES
ASSOCIATION, NC. LOCAL 1000,
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE
COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL

a:rfhD1}ryrL
Superintendent of Schools

21

Civil Service Employees .Association, Inc.

EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO
BROOME
COUN1Y EDUCATIONAL LOCAL 866

Local 1000 AFSCME, AFL-CIO

UNIT 6157-02

B>~· . . . ~~f0d<I/_

fi-Ji:;_--- /)A

Christopher Rohde
Labor Relations Specialist

By Tina 7.dimal
CSEA Unit President

22.

a
