#720

BEFORE ARBITRATOR
STEVEN M. BIERIG
IN THE MATTER OF THE INTEREST ARBITRATION
BETWEEN:
THE VILLAGE OF LAKE BLUFF, ILLINOIS

ISSUES: 1) 2018 WAGES
2) USE OF PART-TIME OFFICERS
ILRB CASE NO. S-MA-16-123

AND
THE ILLINOIS FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE LABOR
COUNCIL

FMCS NO. 170412-01473-6
ARB. NO. 17-99

Before: Steven M. Bierig, Arbitrator
APPEARANCES:
For The Illinois Fraternal Order of Police
Labor Council:

Jeffrey Burke

For The Village of Lake Bluff:

Jill P. O’Brien
Laner Muchin

Locations of Hearing:

40 East Center Ave.
Lake Bluff, Illinois

Date of Hearing:

February 12, 2018

Post -Hearing Briefs Exchanged:

May 7, 2018

Date of Award:

June 6, 2018

1

AWARD:
For reasons stated in this Opinion and Award, the Arbitrator finds:
The following shall be incorporated into the May 1, 2016 – April 30, 2019 Collective
Bargaining Agreement between the parties:
Wages:
The Union’s offer is adopted.
Wage Schedule for
May 1, 2016 – April 30, 2019 Contract
Date
% Increase
May 1, 2016
2.50%
May 1, 2017
2.50%
May 1, 2018
2.50%
TOTAL INCREASE = 7.50%
Use of Part-Time Officers:
The Union’s position is accepted and the status quo shall remain.

Steven
Bierig

Digitally signed by Steven
Bierig
DN: cn=Steven Bierig,
o=Steven M. Bierig -AttorneyArbitrator-Mediator, ou,
email=arb438@comcast.net,
c=US
Date: 2018.06.06 16:22:31
-05'00'

Steven M. Bierig, Arbitrator
June 6, 2018

2

I.

INTRODUCTION
The Interest Arbitration Hearing took place on Monday, February 12, 2018, at 40 East

Center Avenue in Lake Bluff, Illinois. The Hearing commenced at 11:00 a.m. before the
undersigned Arbitrator, who was appointed to render a final and binding decision in this matter.
At the Hearing, the parties presented their positions and evidence in narrative form and were
afforded a full opportunity to examine and cross-examine. A 170-page transcript of the Hearing
was prepared. The parties filed Post-Hearing Briefs that were exchanged through the Arbitrator
on May 7, 2018, at which time the evidentiary portion of the Arbitration was declared closed. All
parties stipulated to this Arbitrator’s jurisdiction and authority to issue a final and binding Award
in this matter. (Jt. Ex. 2)

II.

RELEVANT STATUTORY LANGUAGE
Section of The Illinois statute concerning use of Part-Time Police Officers:
Sec. 3.1-30-21. Part-Time Police. A municipality may appoint, discipline, and discharge
Part-Time Police Officers. A municipality that employs Part-Time Police Officers shall, by
ordinance, establish hiring standards for Part-Time Police Officers and shall submit those
standards to the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.
Part-Time Police Officers shall be members of the regular Police department except for
pension purposes. Part-Time Police Officers shall not be assigned under any
circumstances to supervise or direct full-time Police Officers of a Police department. PatTime Police Officers shall not be used as permanent replacements for permanent fulltime Police Officers.
Part-Time Police Officers shall be trained under the Intergovernmental Law Enforcement
Officer’s In-Service Training Act in accordance with the procedures for Part-Time Police
Officers established by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board. A PartTime Police Officer hired after January 1, 1996 who has not yet received certification
under Section 8.2 of the Illinois Police Training Act shall be directly supervised.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-21; eff. 1/1/96)

3

III.

RELEVANT CURRENT CONTRACT PROVISIONS
ARTICLE IX
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Except as specifically limited by the express provisions of this Agreement, the Council
recognizes that certain rights, powers and responsibilities belong solely to ad are
exclusively vested in the Employer, and these rights shall be liberally construed.
Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it is understood and
agreed that this Agreement does not affect and shall not be deemed or constricted to
impair the Employer’s right, in its sole discretion and judgment. To do the following on
a unilateral basis:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.

o.
p.
q.
r.
s.

To determine, control, regulate and direct matters of inherent managerial
policy;
To supervise and direct the working forces;
To determine the functions of the Police Department and its mission;
To determine the nature and extent of service offered to the public by the
Employer;
To determine, plan, direct and control the Employer's overall budget;
To determine the Employer's organizational structure;
To select new employees, and establish examination techniques and eligibility
requirements;
To assign, reassign, schedule or alter the assignments issued to the working
force or any individual therein;
To plan, direct, schedule, control and determine the operations or services to be
conducted by Officers of the Employer and to change them from time to time;
To hire, promote, demote, suspend, recall, discipline, or discharge nonprobationary employees for just cause;
To hire, promote, demote, suspend, recall, discipline or discharge probationary
employees for any or no reason;
To train employees and select employees for training opportunities;
To change or eliminate existing methods, equipment or facilities or introduce
new ones;
To make, alter, modify, eliminate, and enforce reasonable rules, regulations,
including those known as the Village of Lake Bluff Rules and Regulations for the
Police Department, policies, procedures, special orders and operating
reasonable directives governing matters including, without limitation,
performance, safety, quality, and other behavioral guidelines governing Officers;
To determine the nature, extent, duration, character and method of operation
including the right to contract out or subcontract;
To assign and/or schedule overtime assignments;
To determine the quality and quantity of work required to be performed by the
employees to ensure maximum mobility, flexibility and efficiency of operations;
To determine the methods, means, organization and number of personnel by
which such operations and services shall be made or provided; and,
To establish performance standards and evaluate employees.

4

ARTICLE
XIII
WAGES AND OTHER COMPENSATION
Section 1.

Wages

Employees shall receive an annual salary in accordance with the below schedule:
Patrol Officer

5/1/2014
2.500%

5/1/2015
2.500%

Start
After the End of Probation
After 2 Years
After 3 Years
After 4 Years
After 5 Years

$66,537
$73,921
$77,614
$81,304
$84,997
$88,688

$68,200
$75,769
$79,554
$83,337
$87,122
$90,905

*

*

*

ARTICLE XV
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
Section 1.

Purpose of Article

This Article sets forth the normal work cycle and establishes the basis for calculating
overtime payments. Nothing in this article shall be construed or misconstrued as a
guarantee of hours work per day, per week, or per work cycle.
Section 2.

Normal Work Cycle

The normal work cycle for Officers covered by this Agreement shall be fourteen (14)
days consisting of ten (10) shifts of eight (8) hours. Current lunch/break practices shall
remain in effect.

IV.

THE PARTIES AND ISSUES
The parties to this Interest Arbitration are the Village of Lake Bluff, Illinois (“Lake Bluff”

or the “Village”) and the Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council (the “Union”). This
Interest Arbitration concerns the parties’ Collective Bargaining Agreement in effect from May
1, 2016 through April 30, 2019 (the “Contract”). The Bargaining Unit consists of Police Officers

5

below the rank of Sergeant. The only two issues that are before me are the questions of 2018
Wages and the potential use of Part-Time Officers.

V.

PROPOSED EXTERNAL COMPARABLE COMMUNITIES
Because this is the parties’ first Interest Arbitration, they had not previously agreed

upon external comparables. For the issue of wages, the Union proposes the following four
Comparable Communities, which consist of the organized municipalities within 15 miles of Lake
Bluff, have a population within 50% of Lake Bluff’s population, and within plus or minus 25% of
the traditional comparability factors1:

•
•
•
•

Hawthorn Woods
Kildeer
Lincolnshire
Riverwoods

While the Village did not object to the Union’s external comparables, it contended that
the traditional statutory comparability analysis is not appropriate in this instance. Instead, the
Village offered, for the issue of wages, a list of what it considered Competitive Communities;
these are communities that the candidates for the Village’s Officer vacancies are likely to also
consider. The Village further indicated that they do not consider the list as Comparable
Communities, but rather that the list supports the reasonableness of its proposal. The Village’s
Competitive Communities are as follows:

The Union identified “traditional comparability factors” as (1) equalized assessed valuation; (2) public
safety (Police) expenditures; (3) general fund balance; (4) median household income; (5) median home
value; (6) number of full-time sworn departmental employees; (7) index crimes from 2015 Crimes in
Illinois.
1

6

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Libertyville
Lincolnshire
North Chicago
Vernon Hills
Waukegan
Deerfield
Glencoe
Gurnee
Highland Park
Lake Forest

For the past 10 years, the Village Administrator has used these Competitive Communities for
analysis of the Village’s financial position. (Er. Grp. Ex. 1; Un. Ex. 23; Tr. 15-22, 111-117)

VI.

INTERNAL COMPARABLES
The parties agreed there were no appropriate internal comparables. As discussed

below, the 2018 wage data for only other relevant Public Safety Unit, the Sergeants, is
unavailable. The Village’s Firefighters are all volunteers. The non-public safety Public Works
Unit, represented by the Union of Operating Engineers, Local 150, was not considered
appropriate. (Tr. 89)

VII.

TENTATIVE AGREEMENT
The parties reached a Tentative Agreement regarding other unspecified issues, which

shall be incorporated into this Award.

VIII.

STIPULATIONS OF THE PARTIES
The relevant stipulations between the parties are as follows:

7

1.
Arbitrator’s Authority: Pursuant to Section 14(b) of the Act, the parties
agree to waive a tripartite panel and appoint Steven M. Bierig as the sole Arbitrator and
Chairperson to hear and decide the issue presented. The parties stipulate that the
procedural pre-requisites for convening the arbitration hearing have been met and the
Arbitrator had jurisdiction and authority to rule on those mandatory subjects brought to
him by the Illinois Labor Relations Act.
2.
Hearings: The hearing in this case will convene on February 12, 2018,
and shall continue, if needed, at such other and future dates and times as may be
agreeable to the parties or ordered by the Arbitrator and necessary to conclude the
hearing. The requirements as set forth in Section 1230.80(a) of the Rules and
Regulations of the Illinois Labor Relations Board, regarding the commencement of the
arbitration hearing within fifteen (15) days following the chairperson’s appointment
have been waived by the parties. All hearings will be in [sic] held at the Employer’s
facility, or other location mutually agreed upon by the parties or ordered by the
Arbitrator.
*

*

*

5.
Issues in Dispute: The parties agree that the following issues remain in
dispute: (1) FY 2018 wage increase; and (2) use of part time Officers. The parties agree
that there are no other issues in dispute.
6.
Final Offers: Final Offers shall be submitted on all of the issues prior to
the start of the hearing on February 12, 2018. Once exchanged at the start of the
hearing, final offers on each issue n dispute may not be changed except by mutual
agreement.
7.
Evidence: The parties agree that the following information shall be
submitted by stipulation to Arbitrator Bierig at the start of the hearing:
a. All tentatively agreed upon articles, sections of
subsections of the proposed collective bargaining
agreement (Joint Exhibit 1), which the parties agree
shall be incorporated into the Arbitrator’s Award;
b. These Ground Rules and Stipulations of the Parties
(Joint Exhibit 2);
c. Materials or testimony offered as evidence of the
parties’ bargaining history shall not include the
parties’ “off-the-record” proposals.
*

*

*

9.
Post-Hearing Briefs: A post-hearing brief shall be submitted to
Arbitrator Bierig no later than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the full transcript of
the hearing by representatives of the parties. Extensions of time to file briefs may be

8

mutually agreed to by the parties or allowed by the Arbitrator absent mutual
agreement. The post-marked date of mailing shall be considered to be the date of
submission of a brief. There shall be no reply briefs.
10.
The Award: The Arbitrator shall base his findings and decisions upon the
applicable factors set forth in Section 14(h) of the Illinois Labor Relations Act and issue
the same within 60 (60) days after the submission of briefs or any agreed upon
extension requested by the Arbitrator, and shall retain the entire record in this matter
for a period of six months or until sooner notified by the parties that retention is no
longer required. The Arbitrator will incorporate the Parties’ tentative agreements into
his award and make them part thereof.
*

*

*

(Jt. Ex. 1; Tr. 11)

IX.

ISSUES
As noted above, the issues submitted to the Interest Arbitrator for resolution are:
1)

2018 WAGES (Joint Issue) - Economic

2)

USE OF PART-TIME OFFICERS (Village Issue) – Hybrid

(Tr. 138-141)

X.

THE PARTIES' FINAL OFFERS PRESENTED FEBRUARY 12, 2018

ISSUE
Article XIV, Section
1. Wages

VILLAGE OFFER

UNION OFFER

The following across the board increases will be
provided to covered employees who are employed on
the date(s) indicated:
May 1, 2016

2.5%

May 1, 2016

2.25%

May 1, 2017

2.5%

May 1, 2017

2.25%

May 1, 2018

2.25%*

May 1, 2018

2.25%

Total Increase

7.25%

Total Increase 7.5%

Total Increase 7.50%*

9

*Plus 0.25% as “quid pro quo” for use of Part-Time
Officers
The increases above shall be made retroactive to
employees who were employed on the date(s) indicated
and the date of the issuance of the Arbitrator’s Award.
Article, New
Section , Use of
Part-Time Officers

New

Status Quo

The Village may employ certified part-time Officers to
perform duties covered by this collective bargaining
agreement subject to the following strict conditions in
accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-21:

(i.e., there will be no new language.

1. The village will adopt the hiring standards applicable to
part-time Officers by Ordinance in accordance with the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.
2. Part-time Officers shall be trained under the
intergovernmental Law Enforcement Officer’s In-service
Training Act in accordance with the procedures for fulltime Police Officers established by the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board.
3. Part-time Police Officers shall not be assigned under
any circumstances to supervise full-time Officers of the
Police Department.
4. Part-time Police Officers shall not be assigned under
any circumstances to direct full-time Officers of the Police
Department.
5. Part-time Police Officers shall not be used as
permanent replacements for permanent full-time Officers
of the Police Officers.
6. No part-time Officer used until and unless the parttime Officer has fully satisfied all applicable certification
requirements applicable in Illinois in order to perform
services as a full-time Police Officer.
7. Part-time Officers will only be used to perform hours
of work that exists or become available because a fulltime Officer is unavailable and/or unwilling to work as
scheduled for a period of seven (7) calendar days or
more.
8. Part-time Officers will not be used to permanently
replace a full-time Officer who quits, is retired or leaves
his employment with the Village for any voluntary or
involuntary reason (also referred to as an “attrition

10

factors”).
9. Part-time Officers will not be used for the purpose of
replacing a full-time Officer who is on layoff status.
10. Part-time Officers will not be used to reduce the
number of Bargaining Unit positions or to erode the
Bargaining Unit.
11. Part-time Officers may not be used to reduce
overtime opportunities for full-time Officers. More
specifically, the Department will first offer to full time
Officers the opportunity to work any overtime shift prior
to offering such opportunities to part-time Officers (as
long as the Officer has agreed to work the overtime hours
at least five (5) calendar days from the date/time the
available overtime assignment is posted for foreseeable
overtime shifts).
12. Part-time Officers will be laid off prior to the layoff of
any full-time Officer.
13. The Village will submit the hiring standards applicable
to full-time Police Officers to the Illinois Law Enforcement
Training Standards Board.
14. In the event that the Union and/or a Bargaining Unit
employee has reason to believe a part-time Officer has
not satisfied the condition set forth above and is
otherwise not qualified to safely perform the essential job
functions of a Police Officer (either with or without a
reasonable accommodation of disabled or pregnant), the
parties agree to promptly schedule a meeting at an
agreed upon time and place to discuss the issue by
committee comprised of two (2) Officers designated by
the Bargaining Unit and two (2) members of
management. Time spent by a full-time Officer in
meetings for this purpose will be considered “working
time: of held during the Officer’s scheduled working time.

11

XI.

STATEMENT OF FACTS

A.

Introduction
The Union represents all sworn Police Officers below the rank of Sergeant, who are

employed by the Village. The Bargaining Unit currently consists of 10 Full-Time Patrol Officers.
The Officers are tasked with the duties of law enforcement and patrolling the Village; the
Department operates 8-hour shifts, 7 days per week, 24 hours per day. The instant Union has
represented the Bargaining Unit since at least 2000. The most recent contract expired April 30,
2016. In addition, the Union represents a separate Bargaining Unit consisting of the Police
Sergeants currently comprised of three members. The Police Chief and Deputy Chief are
Management positions outside of the Bargaining Unit. The Sergeants’ Unit contract expired April
30, 2017, and is not involved in the instant matter. (Er. Ex. 2-4, 7; Un. Ex. 6; Tr. 9, 24, 41, 85-86,
90)
The Village also has a non-public safety, non-Interest Arbitration Bargaining Unit
contract. The International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 150 (“Local 150”) represents the
Village’s Public Works Unit, which consists of approximately seven employees. The current Local
150 Contract is in effect until April 2019. (Er. Ex. 5; Tr. 87)
The

Department’s

Special

Order

#01-12-19

addresses

minimum

manpower

requirements and establishes a procedure by which shift coverage is to be handled in the event
of a shortage; Special Order #05-01-01 addresses schedule changes and establishes a procedure
by which the Department handles time requests to use paid time off (vacation, holidays,
personal days) as well as shift changes and trades between Officers. The Department does not
currently use Part-Time Officers, or auxiliary staff. In order to accommodate the three annual
special events hosted by the Village each year, the Department retains its Officers on their

12

regular Patrol duty and utilizes Lake County Sheriff’s Deputies for which the Village pays a
stipend to the County. (Er. Ex. 11-12; Tr. 91-92)

B.

Village Description
The Village of Lake Bluff is a suburb located approximately 35 miles north of downtown

Chicago. Lake Bluff covers approximately four square miles and is bordered by the Great Lakes
Naval Station on the north, Lake Forest on the south, Lake Michigan on the east, and Libertyville
on the west. According to the 2018 Census data, the population of Lake Bluff is slightly below
6,000. The Village government consists of an elected Village President, currently Kathleen
O’Hara, a Board of Trustees, and a Village Clerk. The day-to-day operations are overseen by
Village Administrator R. Drew Griffin. Susan M. Griffin is the Village’s Director of Finance. (Er. Ex.
1, 29, 30; Tr. 85, 87)

C.

Bargaining History Leading to this Interest Arbitration
As noted above, the prior contract between the parties expired on April 30, 2016. On

November 2, 2015, the Union presented the Village with a Formal Notice of Demand to Bargain,
at which time the parties also entered into a Mediation Agreement. The parties held negotiation
sessions in 2016 on April 4, May 6, June 16, July 26, September 23, and December 19, and in
2017, met with a Federal Mediator on September 29, October 18, November 2, and November
20. On December 12, 2017, the Union filed a Demand for Compulsory Interest Arbitration with
the Illinois Labor Relations Board. (Un. Ex. 3)

13

D.

The Statutory Factors
The Bargaining Unit in the instant case consists of sworn Public Safety employees, who

are unable to strike, and is therefore covered by Section 14 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations
Act. Section 14(h) of the Act obligates the Arbitrator to consider the following factors in reaching
a decision:
*
*
*
(h) Where there is no agreement between the parties, or where there is
an agreement but the parties have begun negotiations or discussions
looking to a new agreement or amendment of the existing agreement,
and wage rates or other conditions of employment under the proposed
new or amended agreement are in dispute, the arbitration panel shall
base its findings, opinions and order upon the following factors, as
applicable:
Section 14(h) of the Act requires that the Interest Arbitrator base its decision upon the following
criteria, as applicable:
(1)

The lawful authority of the employer.

(2)

Stipulations of the parties.

(3)
The interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability
of the unit of government to meet those costs.
(4)
Comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment
of the employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages,
hours and conditions of employment of other employees performing
similar services and with other employees generally:
(A) In public employment in comparable communities.
(B) In private employment in comparable communities.
(5)
The average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly
known as the costs of living.
(6)
The overall compensation presently received by the employees,
including direct wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other
excused time, insurance and pensions, medical and hospitalization
benefits, the continuity and stability of employment and all other
benefits received.

14

(7)
Changes in any of the foregoing circumstances during the
pendency of the arbitration proceedings.
(8)
Such other factors, not confined to the foregoing, which are
normally or traditionally taken into consideration in the determination
of wages, hours and conditions of employment through voluntary
collective bargaining, mediation, fact-finding, arbitration or otherwise
between the parties, in the public service or in private employment.
5 ILCS 315/14(h)

Each of these factors is relevant, although no one factor is determinative. An Arbitrator has
discretion to rely upon some factors more heavily than others, where appropriate. The Act does
not rank the factors by importance. In City of Decatur and International Association of
Firefighters, Local 505, S-MA-29 (Eglit 1986), Arbitrator Eglit observed that the importance of
each statutory factor is not ranked: "… moreover, the statute makes no effort to rank these
factors in terms of their significance, and so it is for the panel to make a recommendation as to
which factors bear most heavily in this particular dispute." Thus, some of the statutory factors
may be deemed by the Arbitrator to be more significant than others, depending upon the issues
and the evidence presented. See also City of Waukegan and MAP, Waukegan Police Sergeants,
Chapter No. 285, S-MA-07-092 (Martin, 2008).

XII.

DISCUSSION
A.

Introduction

As noted above, the two issues submitted to this Interest Arbitrator for resolution are:
1)

WAGES (Joint Issue) - Economic

2)

USE OF PART-TIME OFFICERS (Village Issue) – Hybrid

15

After a review of all of the evidence, stipulations, exhibits, testimony, Post-Hearing
briefs and all of the factors identified in Section 14(h), I have reached the following
determinations regarding the issues:

Wages:
The Union’s offer is accepted.
Wage Schedule for
May 1, 2016 – April 30, 2019 Contract
Date
% Increase
May 1, 2016
2.50%
May 1, 2017
2.50%
May 1, 2018
2.50%
TOTAL INCREASE = 7.50%

Use of Part-Time Officers:
The Union’s offer is accepted. The status quo shall remain in that PartTime Officers will not be utilized.
B.

Positions of the Parties and Analysis

1. Wages
The parties’ proposals on wages are as follows:
ISSUE

VILLAGE OFFER

Article XIV, Section
1. Wages

The following across the board increases will be
provided to covered employees who are employed on
the date(s) indicated:
May 1, 2016
2.5%
May 1, 2017
2.5%
May 1, 2018
2.25%*

May 1, 2016
May 1, 2017
May 1, 2018

Total Increase

Total Increase 7.5%

7.25%

Total Increase 7.50%*
*Plus 0.25% as “quid pro quo” for use of Part-Time
Officers

16

UNION OFFER

2.5%
2.5%
2.5%

The increases above shall be made retroactive to
employees who were employed on the date(s) indicated
and the date of the issuance of the Arbitrator’s Award. To
award wage increases as follows:

a.

The Village’s Position on Wages

The Village contends that its final offer for 2018 is reasonable. It is identical to the
Union’s final offer, provided that the Village is permitted the right to use Part-time Officers in
return. Years 2016 and 2017 are not in dispute. The Village also notes that a number of the
traditional Section 14 statutory factors are not in dispute, specifically Factor #1 in that both final
offers are within the lawful authority of the Village, Factor #2 in that the stipulations of the
parties were presented into evidence and agreed to in advance, Factor #3 in that the Village has
the financial ability to pay the Union’s demand, and Factor #7 in that there has been no
substantial change of circumstances since the parties began negotiations.
Regarding Factor #5, the average consumer prices for goods and services, commonly
known as the consumer price index, or CPI, the Village notes that this Arbitrator and others,
have found the CPI to be a very compelling factor. See County of Lake and Lake County Sheriff’s
Department, S-MA-11-066, at p. 24 (Bierig, 2012). See also County of McHenry and IL FOP Labor
Council, S-MA-11-004, at p. 131 (Benn, 2012). Arbitrator Benn stated, “… for comparability
purposes, my focus has been on the best indicator of how the economy is doing – i.e., the cost
of living factor.” See also Highland Park and ICOPS, Arb. Ref. 13.340, at p. 19 (Benn, 2014). The
Village argues that it is well established that when both parties’ final offers exceeds the cost of
living during the successor agreement, the final offer closest to the cost of living should prevail.
See City of Burbank, S-MA-97-56, at p. 9-11 (Goldstein, 1998). According to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics Consumer Price Index for urban areas (“CPI-U”), the month-to-month increase in the

17

CPI from May 2016 through December 2017 was 3.0%, compared to the combined 5.0% wage
increase that was agreed upon for years 2016 and 2017. Thus, over the 3-year term of the
Contract, under the Village’s offer, the Unit members would receive a 7.25% wage increase
whereas the CPI-U is likely to increase a total of 4% during the same 3-year period, making the
Village’s proposal of 2.25% for the third year closer to the CPI-U than the Union’s proposal. The
cost of living factor strongly supports the Village’s proposal on wages.

DATE RANGE

CPI-U
12-MONTH AGGEGATE
May 2016 – Dec 2016
1.0%
Jan 2017 – Dec 2017
2.0%
TOTALS:
3.0%
(Er. Ex. 21)

AGREED
PROPOSAL
2.50%
2.50%
5.00%

Regarding external comparability, the Village argues that the Union’s analysis is faulty.
First, none of the four communities selected by the Union, Hawthorn Woods, Kildeer,
Lincolnshire, and Riverwoods, has a contract extending into 2018. Therefore, information
about those communities offers little or no guidance to the 2018 wage issue here. Second,
the Village contends that the Union’s methodology for selecting comparables was not neutral,
but was rather focused on more affluent communities. Third, the Union openly admitted that
its comparison focused solely on wages, and did not consider the overall compensation
package. The Village notes that under Section 14(h)(4)(A) of the Act, the relevant comparison
must be based on “wages, hours, and conditions of employment,” and not only on wages.
Last, the Village argues that throughout the collective bargaining and mediation process prior
to Interest Arbitration, the Union never mentioned any of the comparables in support of its
economic proposals. The Village argues that two of the four comparables relied upon by the
Union reflect wage increases for 2016 and/or 2017 that were designed to “catch up” for past

18

inequities, thereby inflating their wage increases for those years. Also, while Lake Bluff pays
all but 14% of its Bargaining Unit member’s health insurance premiums, Hawthorn Woods’
Officers must pay 25% of their health insurance premiums. (Tr. 62, 120)
Conversely, for at least the past 10 years, the Village Manager has examined the wages
and insurance paid by Competitive Communities located in Lake County and the North Shore
suburban area of Chicago in order to give his recommendations about annual Village budget
and collective bargaining proposals. The most recent information regarding the Competitive
Communities is identified below:
EMPLOYER

2016

2017

2018

TOTAL
(if available)

Libertyville

2.50%

2.75%

2.50%

8.0%

Lincolnshire

2.50%

N/A

N/A

2.00%

2.00%

2.50%
(1 year)
6%
(plus one time
equitable 2016)

2.75%
2.00%

2.75%
N/A

North
Chicago
Vernon Hills
Waukegan

2.00%
(plus one time
equity potential
11/1/16)
2.50%
2.00%

Deerfield

2.25%

2.50%

N/A

Glencoe
Gurnee

2.50%
2.25% - 3.00% (tied
to CPI-U each year)
2.00%

2.50%

2.75%

Highland
Park
Lake Forest
Village
Proposal
Union
Proposal

2.50%
(Includes 0.50%
equity adjustment)
Unclear, but future
1.00-2.25%
increases tied to
LOS
2.50%
2.50%
2.50%

2.50%

(Er. Ex. 23)

19

2.75%
(Includes 07.50%
equity adjustment)
0.00-2.50%
2.25%
(plus 0.25% for PT
proposal)
2.50%

8.00%
4.00%
(2 years)
4.75%
(2 years)
7.75%
6.75%
(minimum)
7.25%
(includes equity
adjustments)
N/A
7.25%
(plus 0.25%)
7.50%

Regarding internal comparables, the Village noted that there was no internal data
available regarding 2018 wages increases for its other Public Safety Unit, Sergeants, because
the parties did not begin bargaining a successor contract covering the same 3-year period.
The Village did note that the Public Works Department Unit represented by Operating
Engineers, Local 150 provides a 2% wage increase effective May 1, 2018. (Er. Ex. 5; Tr. 88)
Thus, the Village contends that its final offer of 2.25% is not only appropriate for 2018
and is more reasonable than the final offer presented by the Union, but is the offer more
likely to have been agreed upon at the bargaining table. Therefore, the Village’s final offer
should be adopted. (Tr. 118-119)

b.

The Union’s Position on Wages

The Union argues that the evidence supports its proposal on wages as compared to that
of the Village. The Union notes that at issue is only the last year of the 3-year Contract, in which
the Union’s offer is only 0.25% more than that of the Village.
The evidence shows that the Union’s proposal for 2018 more closely matches the
annual increases that the Bargaining Unit has received for many years. From 2012 to 2015 Unit
members received a 2.5% annual wage increase. Prior to 2012, the members received even
greater increases: 4% in 2008 and 2009, 2.75% in 2010, and 2.875% in 2011. Therefore, the 2.5%
the Union offers represents the lowest increase in the past 10 years and continues a pattern of
seven consecutive years of 2.5% annual increases. (Tr. 28, 76)
Regarding external comparability, after its multi-level analysis conducted on a number
of potential Comparable Communities, the Union proposes that Hawthorn Woods, Kildeer,
Lincolnshire and Riverwoods are the most comparable to the Village based upon traditional
comparability factors used. Conversely, the Village has not proposed any external comparables.

20

Although most of the comparables have agreed-upon wage increases for 2016 and 2017, none
have 2018 data available. However, none of the comparables have had wage increases in either
2016 or 2017 lower than 2.5%. For 2016 and 2017, Hawthorn Woods agreed to 3% and 4%
respectively, Kildeer agreed to 2.75% for each of those years, and Lincolnshire agreed to 2.75%
and 2.5% respectively. The data for Riverwoods only shows a 2.5% increase for 2016. The Union
points out that the instant Unit members are neither the lowest nor highest paid compared to
the external communities. Nevertheless, the Unit members will need an increase of no less than
the lowest increase received by comparable external units, that being 2.5%, so as to maintain
the Union’s ranking in comparison to other external comparables. Therefore, the Union’s final
wage offer should be adopted. (Un Ex. 1, 5; Tr. 29-36, 66-68, 79-80, 116, 118)
As for internal comparability, the Union notes that of the Village’s two other Bargaining
Units, the Public Works Department and the Police Sergeants, only the Sergeants bargain
pursuant to Section 14 of the Act. Therefore, the only appropriate internal comparable is the
Sergeants. The Sergeants 2014-2016 agreement provided for a 2.5% wage increase in each of
the three years. That said, however, there is no 2018 data yet available from that Unit.
Regarding the cost of living statutory factor, the Union argues that it is of no value here
because the parties have historically not used the cost of living as a guide. Thus, it dismisses the
cost of living data provided by the Village that shows modest increases in the CPI-U over the
past few years. Nonetheless, the Union points out that the CPI-U for March 2018 was an
increase of 2.4% over March 2017, and thus Unit members’ wage increases will still be
significantly offset by increases in the cost of living. This fact favors the Union’s offer that
provides a 0.25% increase over the final offer from the Village.
The Union argues that there is no question that the Village has the ability to pay the cost
of the Union’s proposal. According to the Union, its 2.5% wage increase would cost the Village

21

just over $200 per year per member during the third year of the Contract. In addition, the
Village’s alternate proposal, an additional 0.25% increase as a quid pro quo for its use of PartTime Officers, would result in a 2.5% increase for year three, which matches the Union year
three proposal. This factor favors the Union’s offer.
The Union requests that its wage offer be adopted.

c.

Analysis

In considering the wage increase proposals of both parties, I find that the statutory
factors favor the Union’s proposal. I base this determination upon a number of factors,
especially the external comparables and the forecasted CPI-U.
First, I find that the external comparables favor the Union. Overall, the 2018 data for
those communities that the Village considers competitive, and for which are not contingent on
unknown factors, shows that the average 2018 wage increase is 2.4%. This average is based
upon the wage increases of Libertyville (2.5%), North Chicago (2.0%), Vernon Hills (2.75%),
Glencoe (2.75%), and Highland Park (2.00%, after subtracting the 0.75% equity adjustment). The
2.4% average of the communities the Village considers competitive is closer to the Union’s 2.5%
proposal than to the Village’s 2.25% proposal without consideration of the additional 0.25%
contingent upon gaining the right to use Part-Time Officers. While the Village asserted at the
Arbitration that it is not offering its list of Competitive Communities as external comparables
pursuant to Section 14(h)4(A), the data should not be ignored.
Next, I note that internal comparables are a significant factor when reviewing Public
Safety Units. Interest Arbitrators place emphasis on the internal comparability factor. See City of
Marshfield, Decision No. 25298-A, p.15 (Nielsen, 1988). In the instant case, however, there is
only one Public Safety internal comparable Unit, the Police Sergeants, and there is no data

22

available for 2018 to offer any guidance. Thus, in this case, the use of internal comparables is
not useful.
Regarding the cost of living factor, I have reviewed the CPI-U and I find that it favors the
Union’s offer. Since 2008, Illinois Arbitrators have recognized the significance of cost of living
data in the wage analysis for purposes of Interest Arbitration. Where both parties’ final offers
exceed the cost of living, Arbitrators have indicated that the final offer nearest to the cost of
living should prevail. See City of Burbank, Case No. S-MA-97-56, p. 9-11 (Goldstein, 1998); See
Also County of McHenry and IL FOP Labor Council, S-MA-11-004, p. 131 (Benn, 2012); See Also
Highland Park and ICOPS, Arb. Ref. 13.340, p. 19 (Benn, 2014).
While I find that the CPI-U is not as significant a factor as it was during the 2008
Recession, it nonetheless continues to be a valuable tool in the determination of an appropriate
compensation offer. Because the wage increase proposal for year three is the only year in
contention, my determination as to whether the CPI-U data favors either proposal must be
based upon a projection. The most recent data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s
Survey of Professional Forecasters projects that the CPI-U for 2018 will be 2.5%. See,
https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professionalforecasters.2
I note that Interest Arbitrators have relied almost exclusively on this particular CPI
forecast tool. As Arbitrator Benn recently observed, “Although not always completely accurate,
the forecasters are the best tool interest arbitrators have to look at future years in collective
bargaining agreements for examination of the cost of living factor – and the Survey of

2

“The forecasters expect current-year headline CPI inflation to average 2.5 percent, up from 2.1 percent
in the last survey.”

23

Professional Forecasters remains one of the most respected.” Cook County Sheriff/County of
Cook, Case No. L-13-005-008 (Benn, 2016); See Also City of Collinsville, Case No. S-MA-12032
(Nielsen, 2013); City of Chicago, Case No. L-MA-12-005 (Bierig, 2013).
In summary, the Union’s wage offer of 2.5% for 2018 is closer to the forecasted change
in the cost of living index than the Village’s wage offer of 2.25%, without the additional 0.25%
the Village offers contingent upon it receiving the right to use Part-Time Officers.
Therefore, based on the factors identified in the Act, especially the external
comparables and the CPI-U, I find that the Union’s offer shall be accepted.

2.

Use of Part-Time Officers

The parties have made the following final proposals regarding a new section relating to
the Village’s potential ability to utilize Part-Time Officers:
ISSUE
Article, New
Section , Use of
Part-Time Officers

VILLAGE OFFER

UNION OFFER

New

Status Quo

The Village may employ certified part-time Officers to
perform duties covered by this collective bargaining
agreement subject to the following strict conditions in
accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-21:

(i.e., there will be no new language.)

1. The village will adopt the hiring standards applicable to
part-time Officers by Ordinance in accordance with the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.
2. Part-time Officers shall be trained under the
intergovernmental Law Enforcement Officer’s In-service
Training Act in accordance with the procedures for fulltime Police Officers established by the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board.
3. Part-time Police Officers shall not be assigned under
any circumstances to supervise full-time Officers of the
Police Department.
4. Part-time Police Officers shall not be assigned under
any circumstances to direct full-time Officers of the Police

24

Department.
5. Part-time Police Officers shall not be used as
permanent replacements for permanent full-time Officers
of the Police Officers.
6. No part-time Officer used until and unless the parttime Officer has fully satisfied all applicable certification
requirements applicable in Illinois in order to perform
services as a full-time Police Officer.
7. Part-time Officers will only be used to perform hours
of work that exists or become available because a fulltime Officer is unavailable and/or unwilling to work as
scheduled for a period of seven (7) calendar days or
more.
8. Part-time Officers will not be used to permanently
replace a full-time Officer who quits, is retired or leaves
his employment with the Village for any voluntary or
involuntary reason (also referred to as an “attrition
factors”).
9. Part-time Officers will not be used for the purpose of
replacing a full-time Officer who is on layoff status.
10. Part-time Officers will not be used to reduce the
number of Bargaining Unit positions or to erode the
Bargaining Unit.
11. Part-time Officers may not be used to reduce
overtime opportunities for full-time Officers. More
specifically, the Department will first offer to full time
Officers the opportunity to work any overtime shift prior
to offering such opportunities to part-time Officers (as
long as the Officer has agreed to work the overtime hours
at least five (5) calendar days from the date/time the
available overtime assignment is posted for foreseeable
overtime shifts).
12. Part-time Officers will be laid off prior to the layoff of
any full-time Officer.
13. The Village will submit the hiring standards applicable
to full-time Police Officers to the Illinois Law Enforcement
Training Standards Board.
14. In the event that the Union and/or a Bargaining Unit
employee has reason to believe a part-time Officer has
not satisfied the condition set forth above and is
otherwise not qualified to safely perform the essential job
functions of a Police Officer (either with or without a
reasonable accommodation of disabled or pregnant), the

25

parties agree to promptly schedule a meeting at an
agreed upon time and place to discuss the issue by
committee comprised of two (2) Officers designated by
the Bargaining Unit and two (2) members of
management. Time spent by a full-time Officer in
meetings for this purpose will be considered “working
time: of held during the Officer’s scheduled working time.

a.

The Village’s Position

Preliminarily, the Village asserts that its use of Part-Time Officers within the restrictions
of its final offer may not even be a mandatory subject of bargaining. Without waiving its right to
assert that position in the future, the Village agreed to submit this issue to this Interest
Arbitrator for the purposes of this Contract only. (Tr. 136, 138)
Regarding comparables, the Village first notes that as an internal comparable, its Public
Works Unit contract with Operating Engineers, Local 150 provides the right to use part-time
employees to perform available work. Regarding the external comparable, it is very significant
that all four of the communities cited by the Union utilize Part-Time Officers to varying degrees.
According to the Village, it intentionally drafted its final offer to include many of the same
safeguards protecting Full-Time Officers’ interests as those found in the instant Union’s
contracts with other communities. (Er. Ex. 5; Tr. 72, 105-106)
The main thrust of the Village’s position turns on the issue of whether the Village’s final
offer constitutes a breakthrough item, or whether it instead qualifies as a relatively minor
change to the status quo, which would require a lower burden of proof. The Village is proposing
only a modest change to the status quo in determining how it will fill occasional vacant shifts
that arise when Full-Time Officers are unavailable. The proposed Contract language provides
unequivocal assurances that no Part-Time Officer would be used to perform any work unless all

26

Full-Time Officers were first offered the opportunity to work on an overtime basis. Further, the
Contract’s Management Rights provision should be liberally construed so as to not impair the
Village’s discretion and judgement to act:
•

To determine, control, regulate and direct matters of inherent managerial
policy;

•

To determine the functions of the Police Department and its mission;

•

To determine the nature and extent of service offered to the public by the
Employer;

•

To determine, plan, direct and control the Employer's overall budget;

•

To determine the Employer's organizational structure;

•

To select new employees, and establish examination techniques and
eligibility requirements;

•

To plan, direct, schedule, control and determine the operations or services
to be conducted by Officers of the Employer and to change them from time
to time;

•

To determine the nature, extent, duration, character and method of
operation including the right to contract out or subcontract;

•

To determine the quality and quantity of work required to be performed by
the employees to ensure maximum mobility, flexibility and efficiency of
operations; and

•

To determine the methods, means, organization and number of personnel
by which such operations and services shall be made or provided.

(Jt. Ex.1, Article IX p. 8)
The Village dismisses the Union’s claim that the use of Part-Time Officers is detrimental
to the Full-Time Officers. The Village denies that Part-Time Officers will have the potential to
erode the Bargaining Unit. Paragraph #5 of the Village’s proposal expressly prohibits the use of
Part-Time Officers as permanent replacements for Full-Time Officers; Paragraph #8 expressly

27

prohibits the use of Part-Time Officers to permanently replace Full-Time Officers through
attrition; Paragraph #9 expressly prohibits the use of Part-Time Officers to replace a Full-Time
Officer who is on layoff status.; and Paragraph #10 expressly prohibits the use of Part-Time
Officers to reduce the number of Bargaining Unit positions or to erode the Bargaining Unit.
Further, the Union’s implication that the use of Part-Time Officers as proposed by the Village
could be in conflict with Illinois law is incorrect. The introduction to the Village’s final offer
expressly states that the use of Part-Time Officers would strictly adhere to the conditions set
forth in the statute related to Part-Time Officers, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-21. (Er. Ex. 19; Tr. 23-24, 5859, 69, 96, 98-99, 103)
The Village rejects the Union’s contention that Part-Time Officers pose a safety risk to
other Officers or to the general public, alleging that they will have less training. Part-Time
Officers would go through the same training qualifications as Full-Time Officers. Paragraph #1
requires the Village to adopt by Ordinance hiring standards for Part-Time Officers that comport
with State of Illinois standards; Paragraph #2 requires Part-Time Officers to be trained to the
State of Illinois standards that exist for Full-Time Officers; Paragraph #6 prohibits the use of a
Part-Time Officer unless and until the Officer has fully satisfied the certification requirements in
Illinois that are required of Full-Time Officers. The Village also refutes the Union’s claim that
Part-Time Officers, by their part-time employment, will not spend as much time in the Village
and, therefore, will have less familiarity with the Village, its streets, its businesses and its
citizens. In response, the Village noted that at the Hearing, the Union was unable to offer
examples of other communities whose Part-Time Officers pose a safety issue. (Er. Ex. 20; Tr. 2526, 96, 103, 143-159)
The Village also rejects the Union’s proposition that the use of Part-Time Officers is
intended solely to save the Village money, and that such savings will come at the expense of

28

public safety. Paragraph #14 of the proposal includes a complaint mechanism for resolving
conflicts regarding the Union’s potential concern if a Part-Time Officer has either not satisfied
relevant proposed conditions or is not qualified to safely perform the essential job functions of a
Police Officer. (Ex. 7; Tr. 25-26, 42, 44, 104)
The Village disagrees with the Union’s argument that the proposal would allow the
Village to use Part-Time Officers for Bargaining Unit work, thereby replacing Bargaining Unit
positions with Part-Time Officers. However, Paragraph #7 requires that Part-Time Officers will
only be used to perform work that exists or becomes available because a Full-Time Officer is
unavailable and/or unwilling to work as scheduled for a period of seven days or more. Paragraph
#11 explicitly states that Part-Time Officers will not be used to reduce overtime opportunities
for Full-Time Officers. The Department will first offer any overtime opportunities to Full-Time
Officers prior to offering such opportunity to Part-Time Officers. (Er. Ex. 15; Tr. 23, 95, 98-99,
101-102)
The Village notes that in other cases, this Arbitrator has applied Arbitrator Nathan’s 3pronged breakthrough analysis to determine whether a party has satisfied its burden of
demonstrating that a change of status quo is necessary:
1) the old system or procedure has not worked as anticipated
when originally agreed to; or
2) the existing system or procedure has created operational
hardships for the employer or equitable or due process
problems for the union; and
3) the party seeking to maintain the status quo has resisted
attempts to bargain over the change (i.e., refused a quid pro
quo).
Will County Board and Sherriff of Will County, Case No. S-MA-88-09 (Nathan,
1988); See also, City of Burbank, Case No. S-MA-97-056 (Goldstein, 1998)

29

Regarding the first prong, the Village asserts that there is little dispute that the existing
system is broken. According to the Village, there are several factors contributing to the instant
proposal for Part-Time Officers. First, the Family and Medical Leave Act had not yet been passed
when the parties negotiated their first contract in 2000. Second, the parties did not anticipate
the 2016 change in Illinois law that requires employers to permit eligible employees to use paid
sick days for their covered family members’ illness, injury and medical appointments.
Consequentially, the number of employees who take extended periods of time off has increased
exponentially. Further, in 2000, the Village could not have anticipated that one out of its roster
of 10 available Full-Time Officers would have had the need to take an extended military leave.
The Village argues that historically, it has operated with a roster of 10 Full-Time Officers
working 8-hour shifts to cover all 21 available shifts every week. There is no dispute that when
the Department is operating with its full roster of 10 Full-Time Officers, it is able to effectively
provide the citizenry excellent protective and law-enforcement services throughout the Village.
The Village argues that this is so even with the unusual increase in theft activity that took place
in 2016 and 2017. (Er. Ex. 8, 11, 16, 25; Tr. 99-100, 110, 125-126).
However, the Department contends that in recent years, there have been several
instances in which the Department was unable to adequately cover all 21 weekly shifts due to
the unavailability of Full-Time Officers for extended periods of time. At the time of the instant
Hearing, only 6 of the 10 Full-Time Officers were available to cover all of the Patrol shifts. Two
Full-Time Officers had not yet completed their Field Training Program and thus could not Patrol
independently, one Full-Time Officer was on extended maternity leave, and one other Full-Time
Officer was on extended military leave and would not complete his deployment until October
2018. (Er. Ex. 8, 17, 18; Tr. 92-94, 125-127, 133)

30

Next, the Village asserts that the second prong of the breakthrough test is met due to
the operational hardship created when a Full-Time Officer seeks time off for extended leave and
no Full-Time Officers are available. Although the Village’s Full-Time Officers have generally been
willing to work additional hours as necessary, the Village contends that it must have a reliable
alternative plan when necessary to avoid situations in which a Full-Time Officer must work 20 or
more hours in a day, as recently occurred. If one additional employee were to take an extended
absence, the Department’s workforce would be reduced by one-third, presuming seven active
Full-Time Officers. The Village emphasizes that this is not a cost savings measure, but
preparation in the event the Village needs additional staff to cover available shifts. (Er. Ex. 15;
Tr. 79, 107, 167)
The evidence shows that, among the 10 Bargaining Unit employees, only 6 were
available to perform Patrol functions independently at the time of the instant Hearing. It is clear
that there may be times when all 10 Full-Time Officers are available and no Part-Time
employees are necessary. The proposed Contract language provides unequivocal assurance to
the Bargaining Unit Officers that no Part-Time Officers would be called upon to work when all 10
Full-Time Officers are available to work. It also provides that in the event that there is a shortage
of Officers, all shifts will be adequately covered.
The Village rejects the Union’s suggestion that it simply hire one or more Full-Time
Officers to meet its manpower needs. It contends that to hire one new Officer, the annualized
cost over the first five years is $143,874. The Village contends that hiring an additional Full-Time
Officer is an extremely inefficient use of the Village’s resources. Such a hire would create excess
staffing, leading to layoffs. The use of Part-Time Officers is a much more efficient use of the
Village’s resources. (Er. Ex. 13-14, 24; Tr. 99, 108-109, 157-158, 167-168)

31

The Village contends that the current system is not working as anticipated. The Village’s
current approach to time off was designed without knowledge of changes in Federal and State
law, and the Village could not anticipate the number of employees taking leaves. The existing
system has created operational hardships for the Department. Although its Officers are
currently working large amounts of overtime, the Village cannot anticipate that that will
continue, especially if another Officer takes extended leave. (Tr. 134-135)
The third prong of the breakthrough test involves whether the party seeking to maintain
the status quo has resisted attempts to bargain over the change. Here, the Union has
consistently refused to engage in serious discussion regarding the Village’s offer. The Union’s
insistence upon maintaining the current system of staffing is not consistent with the realities of
the Village’s obligations to the public and therefore could present a safety risk to the public.
Arbitrators have consistently ruled that where a party has established that there is a need to
depart from the status quo and the opposing party’s rights are not harmed, the change should
be awarded. See Village of Posen, S-MA-09-182, at p. 9 (Fletcher, 2011). (Tr. 44)
Further, while not statutorily required, the Village insists that it offered the Union a
valuable quid pro quo in the form of the 0.25% wage increase. While the Union minimized the
value of that offer, it is relevant that the Union never identified an amount that could justify that
change. The Union has made it clear that they are opposed to using Part-Time Officers and
unwilling to address the problem while at the bargaining table. The Union offered no reasonable
alternative to address or minimize the problem the Village faces. (Tr. 82-83, 97, 165-166)
The Union concludes that for all of these reasons, the Village’s proposal should be
accepted.

32

b.

The Union’s Position

The Union is opposed to adoption of a provision that would allow the Village to employ
Part-Time Officers to perform Bargaining Unit work. Further, the proposal includes an additional
0.25% wage increase should the Arbitrator adopt the proposal, which would make the parties’
wage proposals identical.
First, as a threshold matter, the Union rejects the Village’s assertion that pursuant to the
Management Rights provision, the Village could unilaterally implement use of Part-Time
Officers. The Union argues that it is well established that the use of part-time employees to
perform Bargaining Unit work is a mandatory subject of bargaining. In City of Marengo, 20 PERI
¶99 (2004), the employer hired three Part-Time Officers after one of its Full-Time Officers
resigned and another went on maternity leave. The City did not bargain with the Union prior to
hiring the Part-Time Police Officers, nor did it give notice to implement its decision to assign
Bargaining Unit work to Part-Time Officers. In Marengo, the ALJ found that the use of Part-Time
Officers was a mandatory subject of bargaining. In the instant matter, the parties have
negotiated this issue to impasse and have advanced the impasse to Interest Arbitration,
confirming that it is a mandatory subject.
Regarding the Village’s breakthrough analysis, the Union notes that to seek a
breakthrough carries a very high burden. In this instance, the Village has failed to demonstrate
that the current system, as agreed to by the parties, does not work.
First, the Village has failed to present any evidence to support its determination that
Part-Time Officers are essential for the Village to provide adequate Police services. Current
Bargaining Unit members have been covering all of the required shifts and have been
performing all of the necessary tasks. The Union notes that since 2008, when the Bargaining
Unit consisted of 13 Full-Time Police Officers, the Unit has decreased to its current size of 10:

33

(Un. Ex. 5, p. 21; Tr. 36-41)
The Union argues that the Village’s perceived shortage of Full-Time Officers is of its own
creation. If such shortage is causing a problem, a premise that the Union disputes, the Village
could simply hire one additional Full-Time Officer, which would not even restore the Unit to its
historical level. The Union contends that the lack of evidence presented by the Village supports
the Union’s contention that the use of Part-Time Officers is merely an attempt by the Village to
save money. (Tr. 27, 42)
Further, the Union insists that the Village’s plan would not fulfill its public safety
responsibilities and is ill-conceived. The Village did not know who these Part-Time Officers
would be, where they would come from, and how they would be equipped. Further, the Union
acknowledges that State law provides for a minimum training requirement; however, the Village
has made no provision for the manner in which Part-Time Officers would be familiarized with
the rules, policies, procedures, and practices of the Department. The Union asserts that because

34

these Officers would work only part time, they would spend less time in the Village on duty, and
be less familiar with the local roads, alleys, schools, businesses, and neighborhoods, resulting in
slower response times to emergency calls for service or requests for backups. Even Full-Time
Officers from other communities, used as Part-Time Officers in the Village, will have less
experience and familiarity with the Village. Less familiarity with the Village’s policies and
procedures will lead to more errors in arrests and mishandling of evidence that will result in the
dismissal of more charges. Thus, the Union contends that the Village is taking a gamble on public
safety. (Un. Ex. 5; Tr. 25-26, 50-57)
Further, the Union notes that statutory factor 14(h)(3) requires the Arbitrator to
consider the interests and welfare of the public. If the Village’s proposal was adopted, it is
unlikely that the Village will save money in the long run due to the problems that will result from
a lower quality of service. Specifically, the Union contends that litigation, liability, health
insurance and workers compensation insurance costs will all rise as a result of Part-time Officers
having less experience, less in-service field training, and less familiarity with the Village’s
operations. Ultimately, the public, the Officers and the Village will suffer the consequences. The
Union urges that the system is not broken now, but will be if the Village’s proposal is adopted.
(Tr. 44)
Next, regarding the Village’s contention that other communities have contracts that
permit the use of Part-Time Officers, the Union argues that the Village provided no evidence
that those employers are actually using Part-Time Officers, and if so, to what extent. According
to the Union, the contracts of municipalities may allow for the use of Part-Time Officers, but
does not identify under what circumstances such Officers may be used. For example, Part-Time
Officers might only be used for specific functions, such as directing traffic at a parade once a
year. The fact that a provision exists in a contract to use Part-Time Officers to perform

35

Bargaining Unit work in and of itself does not prove that the employer is actually using them.
(Tr. 72-73)
The Union also argues that the use of Part-Time Officers will have a substantial impact
on the Bargaining Unit members’ work opportunities and erode the Unit. In Marengo, the ILRB
noted that Part-Time Officers have an impact on Bargaining Unit members. Here, Part-Time
Officers taking unfilled shifts will result in fewer overtime opportunities for Bargaining Unit
members. Because the Village can set a lower wage rate initially for Part-Time Officers, the
combination of lost overtime opportunities and the inclusion of lower-compensated employees
will weaken this Unit’s bargaining power. (Tr. 50)
Perhaps most significantly to the Bargaining Unit members, the Union argues that
inclusion of Part-Time Officers raises the concern of the intentions of the Village. The Village has
reduced the Bargaining Unit’s size, and now seeks to replace Full-Time positions with an
undetermined number of Part-Time Officers. Despite the Village’s claims to the contrary, the
evidence demonstrates that the Village will seek to expand the use of Part-Time Officers to the
detriment of Full-Time Officers. (Tr. 23-24, 59, 69)
Last, the Union rejects the Village’s offer to add 0.25% to the third year of its proposed
2.25% wage increase as the quid pro quo to the utilization of Part-Time Officers. The Union
contends that the 0.25% increase is of such a minor consequence, that it cannot be sufficient to
qualify as a reasonable quid pro quo. Thus, the 0.25% is not a true quid pro quo, and does not
compensate for the loss of a significant amount of overtime hours.
Therefore, the Union urges that, for all the above reasons, the Village’s proposal
should not be adopted.

36

c.

Analysis

After a review of the all the evidence and arguments in this matter, I find that the
Village’s proposal is a breakthrough and that the Village has failed to meet its burden to
show that such a breakthrough is appropriate. For the reasons discussed below, the status quo
shall remain.
The initial inquiry in the analysis of this Interest Arbitration issue involves whether the
Village’s proposed use of Part-Time Officers qualifies as a relatively minor change in the status
quo of existing benefit, requiring a lower burden of proof, or whether the Village’s proposal
constitutes a new or dramatically changed benefit that would be considered a breakthrough
issue, requiring a heightened standard of proof. It is well known that the party seeking to
change an existing provision of a contract bears the burden of proving the need for the
change. In cases in which the requested change is to improve the status quo of an existing
benefit, such as an increase in pay or amount of vacation time, Arbitrators require a lower
burden of proof that demonstrates that the change is preferable or more equitable, based on
the factors identified in the Act. Village of Oak Brook and Illinois F.O.P. Labor Council, Case No.
S-MA-09-017 (McAlpin, 2011)
Conversely, where the requested change seeks to create an entirely new or

a

significant change in a benefit or procedure, Arbitrators apply a higher standard, the
breakthrough analysis, before the Section 14(h) factors are considered. “The traditional way of
conceptualizing Interest Arbitration is that parties should not be able to obtain in Interest
Arbitration any result which they could not get in a traditional collective bargaining situation.”
City of Burbank and Illinois Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council, Case No. S- MA-97-056
(Goldstein, 1998)

37

As established in Will County Board and Sherriff of Will County, Case No. S-MA-88-09
(Nathan, 1988) and City of Burbank, Arbitrators typically apply a 3-factor test that a party must
meet in order to demonstrate that a major change in the status quo is needed:
1) the old system or procedure has not worked as anticipated
when originally agreed to; or
2) the existing system or procedure has created operational
hardships for the employer or equitable or due process
problems for the union; and
3) the party seeking to maintain the status quo has resisted
attempts to bargain over the change (i.e., refused a quid pro
quo).
City of Burbank, Case No. S-MA-97-056 (Goldstein, 1998)

With these principles in mind, the Arbitrator considers, “… what the parties may have
reasonably agreed to if they had been successful in compromising and settling the open issues.”
Wood Dale Fire Protection District and Wood Dale Professional Fire Fighters Ass'n, S- MA-07260, at p. 33 (Winton, 2008).
I have carefully considered the record in this case, including all the evidence and
arguments that have been proffered by the parties. I agree with the Union that the Village’s
proposal to permit the use of Part-Time Officers is a breakthrough issue. I find that by proposing
a second tier of employees, even with the proposed restrictions, the Village is attempting to
significantly change the status quo in the Department. I disagree with the Village that this is a
minor change in existing working conditions. Rather, I find that it is a major modification to the
existing personnel structure. Therefore, I shall apply the breakthrough analysis to this matter.
As noted above, the breakthrough analysis calls for a higher burden of proof.

38

I note that the Village testified, and the Union did not dispute, that since 2010, a
period of 8 years, it has essentially maintained the number of Full-Time Officers on its roster at
10. While the Village argues that its proposal has no effect on the current Bargaining Unit, after
applying Arbitrators Goldstein’s and Nathan’s 3-part test, it is evident that the addition of
Part-Time Officers will change the status quo in a significant fashion. I find that the evidence
reveals that the Village seeks to obtain through this Interest Arbitration a significant
departure from the status

quo that qualifies as a breakthrough change based on the

precedent cited above.
Addressing the 3 factors, I first find that the evidence does not establish that the
Department’s current roster of 10 Full-Time Officers has not worked as intended, and thus does
not meet the breakthrough standard. The Village contends that the system is broken because of
unanticipated Federal and State employee leave laws. It claims that when the parties
negotiated their inaugural Contract in 2000, the Family and Medical Leave Act had not yet
been passed. It further claims that the parties did not anticipate in 2016 a change in State law
requiring employers to permit eligible employees to use paid sick days for purposes including
illness, injury and medical appointments of the employee or a covered family member.
According to the Village, the use of Part-Time Officers to supplement its roster of 10
Full-Time Officers will enable the Village to continue to provide excellent Police service
when an excessive number of Full-Time Officers are on extended leave. The first measure of a
breakthrough analysis is:
1) the old system or procedure has not worked as anticipated
when originally agreed to; or

39

I have reviewed the testimony and documentary evidence in this case and find that
it is uncontested that the Village, with 10 Full-Time Officers, has successfully been meeting all
of its Patrol shift requirements, in accordance with Special Order 01-12-19 Minimum Manpower
Requirements, in spite of roster vacancies. I note that three of those vacancies should have
been eliminated by the date of this Award. The Officer on maternity leave was expected to
return to duty by the end of April 2018, as well as the two new hires who were in their FTO
phase, should all have been in full duty status by the issuance of this Award. Last, the Officer
who was on extended military leave status at the time of this Hearing is expected to return in
September 2018.
Thus, I find that the Village’s argument is unpersuasive. The Family and Medical
Leave Act preceded the parties’ 2000 negotiations. There is no evidence in the record that
during the initial contract negotiations in 2000, or during any successor negotiations prior to the
instant matter, the Village sought to employ Part-Time Officers. The Village considers the
system broken because of its unanticipated high use of available Federal and State personal
leave laws. However, the change in Illinois law permitting broader use of sick days for covered
employees does not mandate an increase in the total number of sick days an employee
receives.
Conversely, the Union has argued, and the Village did not dispute, that active FullTime Officers have consistently managed all of the open shifts by working overtime. The
Village cited only one instance in which a Full-Time Officer ended up working 20 hours, a
situation that neither the Village nor the Union wants repeated.

However,

that

one

aberration does not amount to a systemic breakdown that would justify adopting a major
change to the Contact through Interest Arbitration.

40

As noted above, in order to meet the standard for a breakthrough, the party requesting
the breakthrough must prove that the relevant aspects have been met. Interest Arbitration is an
extremely conservative process, and parties must not be able to obtain in Interest Arbitration
what it could not achieve in negotiations. It is a last resort process, only to be utilized when
parties that cannot strike cannot reach agreement after good faith bargaining.
In the instant case, I find that the use of

Full-Time

Officers

to

meet

shift

requirements has worked as intended, albeit not necessarily in a perfect manner, but it has
worked nonetheless. The Village has essentially argued that the current system would work
better with the availability of Part-Time Officers under specified conditions. That very well
may be true. However, that is not the standard required to be met in order to grant a
breakthrough change. That determination is best left to the parties themselves through
collective bargaining and not unilaterally imposed by an Interest Arbitrator.
As noted above, the first prong to meet the threshold of a breakthrough analysis is
to prove that the system is not working as it was intended. The I find that coverage of open
shifts using Full-Time Officers on overtime is working as intended. Even if I were to agree
with the Village that it could function better through the strategic use of Part-Time Officers
filling vacancies exceeding seven days, that does not meet the initial standard to show that
the system is not working as intended. The Village argued that using Part-Time Officers to fill
excessive vacancies is a better approach than hiring one more Full-Time Officer. The Village’s
reasoning is not a valid justification to obtain a breakthrough change in Interest Arbitration. The
Village has not shown that filling open shifts with its current roster of active-duty Full-Time
Officers has not worked as the parties intended.

41

As noted by Arbitrators Nathan and Goldstein, the party pursuing a breakthrough
change to the status quo must show that either the first or second requirement has been
met. The second prong of the 3-pronged test requires that the moving party must show:
2) the existing system or procedure has created operational
hardships for the employer or equitable or due process
problems for the union; and
Based on the evidence presented, I cannot find that the existing system has created
operational hardships for the Village. While there may have been some inconveniences, I do
not find that such inconvenience rises to the level of an operational hardship. Thus, I find that
the Village has been unable to meet either of the first two prongs of the 3-pronged test.
The third prong of the test requires:
3) the party seeking to maintain the status quo has resisted
attempts to bargain over the change (i.e., refused a quid pro
quo).
I note that in order to obtain a breakthrough change, the party seeking the change must
first prove that one of the first two requirements has been met, and further, that the party
seeking to maintain the status quo (here, the Union) has resisted attempts at the bargaining
table to address these issues. As noted above, I have determined that the Village has not met
its initial burden to show that the system is broken or that it has suffered operational hardship.
While it is unnecessary to reach the third prong, I have reviewed the evidence regarding the
parties’ negotiation and mediation sessions.
The Union contends that while the Village has proposed a wage increase of 0.25% if the
Village gained the right to use Part-Time Officers under specified circumstances, the proposal
was not sufficient to qualify as a quid pro quo. Conversely, the Village contends that the Union

42

failed to offer a meaningful counteroffer that would address the Village’s concerns. There is no
evidence in the record to show that the Union ever offered any counter-proposal. Rather, the
Village contends that the Union simply rejected the proposal at the bargaining table and in
mediation. However, the Union contends that essentially, no realistic proposal was presented by
the Village. Thus, the Union contends that it has not resisted bargaining over this issue. It
appears that while the Union did not proffer any offer on Part-Time Officers, it considered the
Village’s proposal to be so minor as to not constitute a proposal.
While I find that there is some evidence to show that the Union did resist bargaining
over this issue, ultimately, because neither the first nor second prongs of the 3-pronged test
were met by the Village, I need not reach a legal determination of whether the Union has
resisted bargaining on the question of Part-Time Officers.
As noted by numerous Arbitrators, Interest Arbitration is a fundamentally conservative
process and parties should not be able to obtain in Interest Arbitration what they could not at
the bargaining table. In the instant case, the Village sought to significantly modify the current
Contract by obtaining the ability to use Part-Time Officers to perform Bargaining Unit work. I
find that this is a breakthrough issue and that the Village has not met its burden to prove that its
proposal meets the standards under the 3-pronged breakthrough test. Thus, the Union’s
proposal is accepted and the status quo shall remain.

43

XIII.

AWARD:
For reasons stated in this Opinion and Award, the Arbitrator finds:
The following shall be incorporated into the May 1, 2016 – April 30, 2019 Collective
Bargaining Agreement between the parties:
Wages:
The Union’s offer is adopted.
Wage Schedule for
May 1, 2016 – April 30, 2019 Contract
Date
% Increase
May 1, 2016
2.50%
May 1, 2017
2.50%
May 1, 2018
2.50%
TOTAL INCREASE = 7.50%
Use of Part-Time Officers:
The Union’s position is accepted and the status quo shall remain.

Steven
Bierig

Digitally signed by Steven Bierig
DN: cn=Steven Bierig, o=Steven M.
Bierig -Attorney-Arbitrator-Mediator,
ou, email=arb438@comcast.net,
c=US
Date: 2018.06.06 16:22:59 -05'00'

Steven M. Bierig, Arbitrator
June 6, 2018

44
