COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE TOWN OF SEYMOUR, CONNECTICUT
AND
THE SEYMOUR POLICE UNION LOCAL #564
AND
COUNCIL #15, AFSCME, AFL-CIO
JULY 1, 2014 TO JUNE 30,2020

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

Table of Contents
PREAMBLE

........................................................................................................................... I

ARTICLE I

RECOGNITION ............................................................................................... I

ARTICLE2

DUES DEDUCTIONS ...................................................................................... I

ARTICLE3

MANAGEMENT RIGHTS .............................................................................. 2

ARTICLE4

GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE ..................................... 3

ARTICLES

DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE ................................................................... 4

ARTICLE6

SICK/PERSONAL LEAVE .............................................................................. 6

ARTICLE 7

FUNERAL LEAVE ........................................................................................ I 0

ARTICLES

UNIFORM ALLOWANCE ............................................................................ I 0

ARTICLE9

HOLIDAYS .................................................................................................... II

ARTICLE 10

OVERTIME .................................................................................................... 13

ARTICLE 12

SENIORITY ................................................................................................... 15

ARTICLE 13

HOURS OF WORK ........................................................................................ 16

ARTICLE 14

EXTRA OR SPECIAL POLICE DUTY ........................................................ 18

ARTICLE 15

PENSIONS ..................................................................................................... 20

ARTICLE 16

RATES OF PAY ............................................................................................. 20

ARTICLE 17

HEALTH AND MEDICAL PLAN ................................................................ 21

ARTICLE 18

ASSIGNMENT AS DESK OFFICER OR REPLACEMENT DETECTIVE 24

ARTICLE 19

SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL ................................................................................ 25

ARTICLE20

REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES ........................................... 25

ARTICLE 21

PROMOTIONS ............................................................................................... 25

ARTICLE22

GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................. 27

ARTICLE23

ASSIGNMENT TO SPECIALIZED POSITIONS ......................................... 29

ARTICLE24

SHIFT SWAPPING ........................................................................................ 30

ARTICLE 25

LONGEVITY ................................................................................................. 30

ARTICLE26

ALCOHOL AND DRUG FREE WORKPLACE AND DRUG TESTING ... 31

ARTICLE27

TRAINING ..................................................................................................... 32

ARTICLE28

DURATION AND RENEWAL ..................................................................... 32

APPENDIX A

JOB DESCRIPTION ...................................................................................... 34

{00755217.DOCX Ver. 1}

APPENDIXB

CENTURY PREFERRED AND BLUE CARE POS PLANS ....................... 46

APPENDIXC

HDHP PLAN SUMMARY............................................................................. 51

APPENDIXD

DENTAL PLAN ............................................................................................. 55

APPENDIXE

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT........................................................... 57

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

PREAMBLE
This Agreement is entered into by the Town of Seymour, hereinafter referred to as the
Town, and the Seymour Police Union, Local #564 and Council 15, American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO, hereinafter referred to as the Union.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
Section I.
The Town recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent
for all full-time and part-time investigatory and uniformed members of the Police Department,
with authority to exercise police powers, below the rank of Deputy Chief.
Part-time police officers are employed under the terms and conditions
Section 2.
within this Agreement. All part-time uniformed members of the Police Department shall serve a
probationary period of one year after receiving certification from the State of Connecticut.
Probationary employees may be terminated by the Board of Police Commissioners in its sole
discretion, and they shall have no right to grieve or arbitrate their termination.

ARTICLE2
DUES DEDUCTIONS
Section I.
The Town agrees to deduct Union dues and an agency service fee on each
pay date from the pay of those employees who individually and in writing have authorized such
deductions and send such authorization to the Chief of Police or his designee. The amounts to be
deducted shall be certified to the Town by the Union, and the aggregate deductions of all
employees shall be remitted together with a statement to the Union after such deductions.
Authorization submitted in accordance with this section shall remain in effect for the duration of
this Agreement.
Section 2.
The Union will notify the Town of the name and title of the Union official
responsible for all matters relating to dues.
Section 3.
The Union agrees to indemnify and hold the Town harmless for any and
all claims arising out of any such deductions.
Part-time officers are responsible to pay Union dues in the amount
Section 4.
required by Council15. Part-time officers must pay their dues in one of the following ways:
a. A lump sum representing the annual dues payable to Council 15 on or before January
I of each calendar year; said sum shall be payable prospectively.
b. Recurrent sums deducted from the first ten (I 0) paychecks of each calendar year
received by the part-time officer; the total sum paid shall be equal to the total annual
dues payable in each calendar year; said sums shall be paid contemporaneously
and/or prospectively.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. 1)

1

ARTICLE3
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section I.
The Town has and will continue to retain, whether exercised or not, all of
the rights, powers and authority heretofore had by it and, except where such rights, powers and
authority are specifically relinquished, abridged or limited by the provisions of this Agreement, it
shall have the sole and unquestioned right, responsibility and prerogative of management and the
affairs of the Town and direction of the working forces, including, but not limited to the
following:
o

to determine the public safety requirements of the Town;

o

to appoint, assign and transfer personnel subject to the terms of this Agreement; to
determine the number and types of full-time and part-time officers required to
perform the Town's operation;

o

to establish standards regarding performance of the work force; to discontinue
services, positions or programs in whole or in part; and to insure that incidental duties
connected with departmental operations whether enumerated in job descriptions or
not, shall be performed by full-time and part-time officers;

o

to discharge or impose other disciplinary actions for just cause upon its personnel and
to prescribe and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the maintenance of
discipline and for the performance of work in accordance with the requirements of the
Town;

o

to lay off full-time and part-time officers from duty for lack of work when it shall be
in the best interest of the Town or the Department;

o

to take all necessary actions to carry out the mission of the Department in times of
emergency; and

o

to determine the type, care, maintenance and operation of equipment and property
used for and on behalf of the purpose of the Town.

No prior practice of the parties shall be required to be continued except for
Section 2.
those specifically enumerated in this Agreement. Thus, the parties shall have no right to demand
anything not provided for in this Agreement.
Section 3.
No act or omission of the parties prior to the signing of this Agreement or
during this Agreement shall be used in any way to establish any "past practice" of the parties.
Section 4.
Agreement.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

Part-time officers are entitled to the protections of Article 3 of this

2

ARTICLE4
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

Section I.
The purpose of the grievance procedure shall be to settle grievances on as
low an administrative level as is possible and practical so as to insure efficiency and employee
morale.
A grievance is defined as any dispute between an employee and/or the
Section 2.
Union and the Town over the interpretation or application of a specific Section or Article of this
Agreement or any rule or regulation, policy, general order, charter' or ordinance provision(s)
pertaining to the Seymour police Department.
Section 3.
Grievances must be filed in writing within fifteen (15) working days of the
event giving rise to the grievance. The Article(s) or Section(s) of the Agreement involved, as
well as the remedy sought, must be set forth in the grievance. All grievances shall be handled in
accordance with the procedures set below in this Article.
Section 4.
Any employee may use this grievance procedure at step one with or
without the assistance of a representative, The Union shall be given prompt notice of such
individually processed grievances and/or notice prior to the settlement of such grievance. When a
grievance is processed individually and the Union later proceeds with such a grievance to
Arbitration, the grievance may be amended prior to the Arbitration proceeding by the Union.
Section 5.
STEP ONE: An employee or his representative, if represented, may
submit a grievance in accordance with this Article to the Police Chief, or in his absence, to his
designee, who shall not be a member of the bargaining unit. The Chief or said designee,
whichever the case may be, will make an effort to resolve the grievance and will render an
answer to the grievance in writing within fifteen (15) working days of the receipt of the
grievance. This answer will be provided to the aggrieved employee and his representative, if
represented.
STEP TWO: If the Union is not satisfied with the decision rendered by the
Section 6.
Police Chief or his designee acting in his absence, it may submit the grievance in writing to the
Board of Police Commissioners within fifteen ( 15) working days of receipt of the decision. The
Board shall consider the grievance at its next scheduled meeting. After considering the matter,
the Board shall have until its next regularly scheduled meeting to issue a written decision which
shall be delivered to the Union within fifteen (15) working days thereafter. If denied, the Board
shall state the reason(s) for such decision.
Section 7.
STEP THREE: If not settled, the grievance may be submitted to
arbitration before the Connecticut State Board of Meditation and Arbitration ("CSBMA"). The
Union may elect to utilize the expedited arbitration process as provided by the CSBMA instead.
A request for arbitration shall be in writing and must be filed with the State Board of Mediation
and Arbitration within fifteen (15) working days of the receipt of the decision of the Board of
Police Commissioners. The Union will advise the Board of Police Commissioners in writing of
any submission of a grievance to arbitration.
Section 8.
The arbitrators designated herein shall decide only one (I) grievance at a
time. The award shall be final and binding as provided by law. They shall be bound by and must

{007SS217.DOCX Ver. I}

3

apply all the terms of this Agreement and shall have no power to add to, subtract from, or in any
way modify the provisions of this Agreement.
Section 9.
Any time limits specified in this Article, except for the initial filing of the
grievance, may be extended by mutual agreement in writing by the parties to this Agreement,
provided that if a grievance is not submitted by the employee or his representative to a higher
step in the procedure delineated in this Article, it will be deemed settled on the basis of the
answer in the last step. In the event the Town fails to respond within the time limits provided in
Sections 5 or 6 of this Article, the grievance shall be resolved in favor of the aggrieved and/or
the Union, whichever is applicable.
Section I 0.
Section II.
Agreement.

Each party shall bear its own expenses for arbitration.
Part-time officers are entitled to the protections of Article 4 of this

ARTICLES
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
Section 1.

The Town shall have the right to discipline or discharge employees for just

cause.
The Chief of Police or in his absence, his designee who shall not be a
Section 2.
member of the bargaining unit, shall have the authority to discipline an employee or take other
appropriate action for that employee's acts or omissions in accordance with this Article. Once the
Chief or his designee outside the bargaining unit disciplines an officer, there shall be no further
discipline or investigation. He may place an employee on administrative leave with pay pending
a hearing with the Board of Police Commissioners.
Section 3.
Any charge or complaint by a member of the public against any police
officer may be made, but neither the Chief nor the Board of Police Commissioners shall
recognize the charge or complaint as valid unless it is in writing and signed by the complainant
under oath. This section shall not preclude the Chief or· the Board of Police Commissioners
themselves from initiating a civilian complaint against a police officer provided it is also in
writing and signed by either the Chief or a member of the Board of Police Commissioners.
a)
Said writing shall include a particular description of the acts and conduct
complained of. It shall include the names of witnesses and their addresses, if known to
the complainant. The Union and the employee involved shall be informed of such
complaint, and a copy shall be provided within 48 hours after it is received by the Chief
of Police.
b)
Investigation of citizen complaints shall be completed within 90 calendar days
from the receipt of the complaint. If no charges are brought within said 90 days, the said
complaint will be dismissed "with prejudice." If charges are brought within such 90-day
period, a disciplinary hearing will be scheduled before the Board of Police
Commissioners not later than thirty (30) calendar days thereafter, and all disciplinary

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

4

proceedings shall be completed not later than thirty (30) days beyond that date. The time
limits encompassed herein may be extended by the mutual consent of the parties.
c)
Civilian complaint forms shall be made available at the front desk of the Seymour
Police Department.
Section 4.
The Board of Police Commissioners shall have the authority to discharge
and/or discipline an employee for that employee's acts or omissions. The Board can place an
employee on a non-disciplinary administrative leave with pay for ten (10) working days before
the hearing commences, The Board will commence a hearing within thirty (30) calendar days of
being notified by the Chief or his designee of the acts or omissions of the employee, or otherwise
upon receipt of the Internal Affairs investigation report, whichever is later, The Board can
continue the administrative leave with pay until the hearings are complete and a final decision is
made by the Board. The Board has twenty-one (21) calendar days to make a final written
decision to the employee and the Union when the hearings have been deemed closed by the
Board. The time limits for a final decision shall be extended by the Board of Police
Commissioners if the employee is involved in court action pertaining to the charges against said
employee, however, the employee shall be on leave with pay until a final decision is made.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the employee has been arrested or charged with any
felony, the Board, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police or his designee, may place
the employee on a non-disciplinary unpaid administrative leave if the employee has had or been
provided with the opportunity to have an informal Loudermi/l hearing before the Chief or his
designee at which he was informed of the charges against him and the material evidence
supporting the charges and provided with an opportunity to present his side of the story. If the
criminal charges are unconditionally dismissed or nolled or the employee is acquitted, effective
that date the unpaid leave will be converted to paid leave, and if the Board's final decision does
not discharge or suspend the employee without pay for just cause, the employee will be promptly
reimbursed for all normal (regular) salary lost (the rate listed in Article 16) as a result of being
placed on unpaid administrative leave. If the Board's final decision discharges the employee, no
reimbursement will be made, and if the Board imposes a disciplinary suspension without pay, the
employee will be reimbursed for the time the unpaid administrative leave exceeds the period of
the suspension without pay.
Section 5.
Any employee against whom disciplinary action is contemplated shall be
confronted with the charges against that employee and shall be given an opportunity to respond
to those charges. A copy of the charges, a list of all witnesses, and copies of all statements and
reports relating to the incident shall, if available, be given to the Union at least seven (7) calendar
days prior to any hearing.
Section 6.
Any disciplinary action by the Chief of Police or said designee acting in
his absence with respect to an employee shall be treated as a STEP I decision under the
grievance procedure of this Agreement, and the aggrieved employee or his representative, if
represented, may submit a grievance to the next higher step in accordance with this Agreement.
Any disciplinary action or discharge by the Board of Police Commissioners shall be treated as a
STEP 2 decision and may be submitted to the next higher step in accordance with this
Agreement.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

5

Section 7.
It is expressly agreed that the grievance and arbitration machinery
provided by this Agreement shall be the only recourse for an employee, or his representative, if
represented, if that employee or his representative is dissatisfied with discipline or a discharge
received for just cause, statutory or other avenues of recourse notwithstanding. If any conflicts
occur between any part of this Agreement and the Board of Police Commissioners' Rules and
Regulations, the Town Charter, or any statutory provisions, this Agreement shall take
precedence.
Section 8.
At any disciplinary hearing in public session conducted by the Board of
Police Commissioners, witnesses shall be sworn, affected employees shall have the right to
representation at their or expense, and the hearing shall be audio recorded, video recorded with
sound, or a stenographic recording made by a court reporter. If the hearing is audio or video
recorded, the Town will provide the Union with a free copy. If the record is transcribed by a
court reporter, each side will pay for its own copies. The Union may independently record the
session. The Norma Drummer room will be used whenever possible.
Any disciplinary hearings conducted by the Board of Police
Section 9.
Commissioners shall be closed to the public, including the press, unless the employee requests an
open hearing
Whenever a civilian complaint is made against a member or group of
Section I 0.
members of the bargaining unit and said complaint results in court action, said member(s) shall
be entitled to representation by the Town Counsel, or at the option of the Town Counsel, another
attorney with said fees to be paid by the Town.
Section II.

Part-time officers are entitled to the protections of Article 5.
ARTICLE6
SICK/PERSONAL LEAVE

Section I.
General: Sick leave shall be considered to be absence from duty with pay
for the following reasons:
(A)
Illness or injury, except where directly traceable to employment by an employer
other than the Town of Seymour.
(b)
When the employee is required to undergo medical, optical or dental treatment
and only when this cannot be accomplished during off-duty hours.
Workers' Compensation- Civil Suit: Employees may be absent from duty
Section 2.
without loss of sick time and with pay for the following reasons:
(A) If an employee loses time because of an injury sustained in the line of duty for
which he is entitled to compensation under the Workers' Compensation Act, the Town shall
make up the difference in the amount of such compensation received and the employee's normal
amount of weekly pay (the Town's payment shall be termed the "Supp"). The Supp shall be
paid for a period up to eighteen (18) months from date of injury if the injured employee is
absent 18 continuous months or for up to 18 cumulative months if the employee is absent
intermittently.
{00755217.DOCX Ver. 1}

6

(B) If an employee receives a cash settlement from a civil suit for injuries received as
described in Section 2(A) of Article 6, such employee shall reimburse the Town the amount of
money received from the Town.
Section 3.

Sick Leave Allowance:

(A)
Sick and personal leave days shall be earned by each employee at the rate of one
and one-half (1112) working days for each calendar month of service, the total of which shall not
exceed eighteen (18) working days in any twelve months. All employees at the beginning of the
fiscal year shall be advanced eighteen (18) sick and personal leave days to be drawn upon in the
coming year. Sick leave is not to be considered as extra vacation time, except under the
provisions of Section 4(b)(2) below. If any employee terminates his employment with the
department for whatever cause, he shall pay back to the Town any unearned sick leave or
personal leave days used prior to his termination date.
(B) Sick leave and personal leave days shall not continue to be earned during leaves
of absence without pay.
(C) Each contract year, employees shall be allowed to use their sick days or personal
leave days up to the maximum earned and allowable in Section 3(A) of this Article. For days
used as personal leave days, the employee shall make a request and seek approval of the Chief of
Police, or his designee, at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance. If the request is made with less
than forty-eight (48) hours' notice, said request shall be approved if the employee finds a
replacement to work his or her shift. Sick days shall be deducted from the sick days earned.
Section 4.

Sick/Personal Leave-Earned. Accumulated and Advanced:

(A)
Sick leave and personal leave shall continue to be earned during leaves of absence
with pay and during the time an employee is on authorized sick leave, injury leave, or vacation
time.
(B)
Employees may retain the unused sick leave and personal leave up to a maximum
of 60 days. The employee may, at his option, use frozen banked leave in one of the following
ways:

(I)

The employee may use such accumulations as sick leave.

(2) The employee may use such accumulation as vacation time subject to the
approval of the Chief of Police and consistent with this contract and with department needs.
(3) The employee may elect to retain such accumulation until he/she separates
from employment (inclusive of retirement, termination or death), at which time the employee, or
survivor upon the employee's death, shall be paid 100% of the accumulated sick and personal
leave days up to a maximum of 60 days at his/her prevailing day rate at the time of separation.
Upon the death of any employee, the survivor shall be paid the unused, earned sick and personal
leave accumulated during the fiscal year in which he or she dies.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

7

(C)
No sick leave and personal leave with pay in excess of leave accumulated to an
employee's credit may be used unless authorized in advance by the Board of Police
Commissioners. Such authorization shall not exceed two (2) years leave allowance.
Section 5.
Medical Certificates and Inspections: A medical certificate acceptable to
the appointing authority may be required for the following reasons:
(A)

For any period of absence consisting of more than three (3) consecutive working

days.
(B) When it is reasonably presumed that a member of the immediate family is
suffering from a contagious disease which may endanger the health of other employees of the
department.
Section 6.
Every police officer shall be required to undergo a physical examination
once every two years by a physician of his choice, provided the physician participates in the
current health insurance plan. The Town shall pay the costs of such physical not covered by
insurance, including the employee's co-pay and tests or procedures ordered by the physician as
part of the physical. Said physician shall certify to the Town that the physician had examined a
copy of the job description for the position (attached hereto as Appendix A) and determined as a
result of said description that the officer is either physically capable or incapable of performing
the essential functions of the position. If said physician determines that the officer is incapable of
performing the essential functions of the position, the officer shall agree to release to the Town a
detailed medical report indicating the basis for said determination concerning the medical
condition of the officer. The results of the physical will be kept confidential and placed in the
employee's medical file.
Section 7.
(A)

Sick Leave Records:

The Department shall maintain a record for each employee of all sick leave.

Section 8.

Sick Leave: Accident and Sickness Insurance Policy:

Under the terms of the short term disability plan, employees will have deducted from
their sick leave the same percentage of sick time as the Town contributes toward their week's
pay.
Section 9.

Annual Redemption of Unused Sick Leave:

In the final pay period of each fiscal year, each employee may bank up to eighteen (18)
remaining sick and personal leave days, not to exceed 120 banked sick and personal leave days.
Employees may be paid 100% for up to fifteen (15) sick and/or personal leave days remaining
unused for that year instead of banking the unused sick and/or personal leave days.

(00755217.DOCX Ver. l}

8

Section I 0.

Light Duty Assignments

The Town may require employees on leave due to work-related or non-work-related
injuries or illnesses who are released to return to work at less than full duty to perform modified
light duty work assignments consistent with the work restrictions imposed by their treating
physicians. Modified light duty assignments are temporary and are intended to transition the
return to full duty of employees who are temporarily disabled from performing their full duties,
such as employees recovering from illness, injury, or a medical procedure. Employees must
participate in the Town modified light duty program and perform appropriate light duty
transitional work consistent with their medical restrictions to the extent such light duty work is
available.
The Connecticut Workers' Compensation Act requires employers to offer employees who
receive temporary partial disability benefits light duty work, if such work is available, whenever
a physician has cleared the employee for such work.
Light duty assignments will be limited to police related duties. Employees assigned to a
modified light duty assignment for a full 5-day week will be paid at their straight time hourly
rate for 40 hours and will work light duty 4 out of the 5 days with one paid day off in addition
and adjacent to the employee's regular days off. Employees on workers' compensation leave
who are released to return to light duty but fail to promptly so notify their supervisor or who
refuse to perform a light duty assignment within their medical restrictions are not eligible to
receive a salary differential under Section 2(A) of this Article 6.
Employees assigned to modified light duty will: (a) carry their authorized firearm but will
not be in uniform; (b) have the same days off they had on their date of injury unless otherwise
agreed; and (c) be given time off to attend medical appointments. Employees on light duty are
strongly encouraged to schedule medical appointments outside of their working hours when
possible.
Employees who are cleared to return to work with restrictions must promptly provide a
writing signed by their treating physician, physician's assistant or APRN that sets forth the
specific work restrictions and the actual or estimated duration of the restrictions. Employees
assigned to a light duty assignment are not, under any circumstances, to perform any work task
that exceeds their physician-imposed restrictions. If instructed by a supervisor to perform a task
that exceeds a work restriction, the employee should refuse to perform the task and explain to the
supervisor that doing so would exceed his or her medical work restrictions.
Employees on light duty assignments are not counted toward mm1mum manning
requirements. Employees on modified light duty assignments generally are not eligible for
overtime and are not allowed to work private duty assignments.
Once an employee reaches maximum medical improvement, he or she is no longer
eligible for transitional light duty. Generally, an employee will be on light duty no more than six
cumulative months; however, the Chief may in his discretion extend that limit.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

9

The parties recognize that unforeseen issues may arise from implementation of light duty
work assignments. If issues arise, the parties agreed to bargain with respect to them.
ARTICLE7
FUNERAL LEAVE

Section I.
Special Leave of five (5) working days with pay shall be granted to an
employee from the date of death of his:
Spouse
Mother
Brother

Father
Sister
Child

Domestic Partner
Step-Child
Step-Parent

Special Leave of three (3) working days with pay shall be granted to an
Section 2.
employee from the date of death of his:
Daughter-in-law
Brother-in-law
Sister-in-law

Grandchild

Grandparent related by blood or marriage
Mother-in-law

Father-in-law

Son-in-law
or relative domiciled in the employee's household
Section 3.

Special Leave of one {I) working day with pay shall be granted to an

employee from the date of death of his:
Aunt or Uncle related by blood
Niece

Nephew

ARTICLES
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE

Section I.
The uniform (including leather after the initial issuance) and cleaning
allowance shall be $1,500 per annum to employees who have worked a minimum of 160 hours in
the six months preceding the first pay periods in August and February. The allowance shall be
paid in two equal lump sum payments. The payments shall be made during the first pay period in
August and first pay period in February. The Department shall pay for any ordered uniform
changes.

{00755217.DOCXVer.l)

10

Section 2.
All employees receiving an allowance under this Article shall be subject to
regular inspections at the discretion of the Chief of Police, or in his absence, his designee.
Section 3.
If any portion of an employee's uniform is damaged or destroyed in the
line of duty, the cost of replacing it shall be paid by the Town, unless the damage to the uniform
resulted from the employee's negligence. Any judgments or allowances made by a court of law
with respect to uniforms which are collected, shall be offset against the cost of repair or
replacement of the uniform and the Town shall be reimbursed.
Section 4.
During the months of November, December, January and February while
within the time period described as the winter uniform, officers will wear a mock turtleneck,
dickie type turtleneck or turtleneck as part of their everyday uniform. (Patrol Officers and
Detectives will wear navy blue and Sgt. will wear white when wearing their white shirts.)
Section 5.
New hires and lateral transfers shall receive a full uniform and cleaning
allowance of $1,500 advanced on their official start date. Thereafter, new hires and laterals will
fall in with all other full-time employees.
Section 6.
The uniform allowance for part-time officers shall be $450 per annum.
The uniform allowance shall be paid in two equal lump sum payments. The payments shall be
made during the first pay period in August and the first pay period in February, provided the
part-time officer has worked a minimum of 160 hours in the six months preceding each of the
two pay periods. The Police Department shall pay for any ordered uniform changes.
Section 7.
Sections 2, 3, 4, and 6 of this Article apply to part-time officers. When
hired, part-time officers will receive a full uniform and a cleaning allowance of $450 advanced
on their official start date. Thereafter, new hires will fall in with all other part-time employees.
ARTICLE9
HOLIDAYS
(a) The following fourteen (14) holidays shall be granted to all members,
Section I.
either as paid holidays or compensatory time-off holidays, at the option of the member, and as
provided for hereinafter:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Washington's Birthday
Lincoln's Birthday
Good Friday
Easter
Memorial Day

Fourth of July
Labor Day
Veteran's Day
Columbus Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Employee's Birthday

(b)
All the above holidays shall be celebrated as designated by the Town of Seymour,
except the Employee's Birthday which shall be celebrated as per past practice. However, with the
approval of the Chief or his designee, the employee may switch a holiday day off.

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

11

Section 2.
In the event of an unforeseen national or state holiday which is declared as
such and is celebrated by the municipality, each employee shall receive an additional paid
holiday whether or not the employee worked on such date.
Section 3.
An employee working on a holiday may choose to be paid either at his
regular rate of pay for the hours he works and time and one half for any hours worked in excess
of eight (8) hours on that day provided that he shall be entitled to a compensatory day off to be
scheduled with the approval of the Chief of Police; employees may choose instead to be paid at
double their regular rate of pay for all hours worked on the holiday, with no compensatory day
off. Employees working on New Year's Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas will be paid double
their regular rate of pay for all hours worked and shall be entitled to a compensatory day off.
Employees shall be reimbursed for working on a holiday in the pay period immediately
following the pay period in which the holiday occurred. Employees must take this compensatory
day within 30 calendar days of the holiday or they will lose it, subject to the provisions of
Section 4 below.
Employees may accumulate three (3) time-off holidays to be used in that
Section 4.
fiscal year. The maximum number of these holiday camp days that an employee can use in any
given week shall be two (2) per work week. If the employee so desires, such days shall be in
conjunction with the member's regular day off. Not less than two (2) days' notice shall be given
by each officer who has worked one (!) of the holidays referred to herein, but in the event a day
is requested of less than two (2) days' notice, the requesting officer must get his own
replacement. In the event of the latter, no time off' shall be granted if a replacement is not found.
No more than one (I) person per shift may utilize accumulated time-off holidays at the same
time without consent from the Police Chief or his designee.
Section 5.
In the event an employee is off-duty on a service-connected disability on a
holiday, the employee shall not forfeit the holiday(s) and shall either, at the employee's option,
get paid for said holiday(s) at the rate of pay at the time of his or her request or be given the
opportunity, with a minimum of two (2) days' notice, to take a compensatory day off with pay in
lieu of payment.
Employees who are off duty on any of the approved holidays by reason of
Section 6.
sick leave, vacation, regular days off or other approved leave, shall receive a compensatory day
off to be scheduled with the approval of the Chief of Police.
Section 7.
In the event an employee has earned unused holiday time and either retires
or otherwise terminates his employment with the Seymour Police Department, he shall be
compensated for such earned and unused holiday time at the prevailing rate of pay received by
such employee on the date of his termination. In the event of an employee's death, the sums due
him shall be paid to his or her beneficiary or next of kin, in that order. Payment for holidays shall
only be for the days earned up to the date of retirement, termination and/or death.

{007SS217.DOCX Ver. I}

12

ARTICLE 10
OVERTIME

Section 1.
All overtime shall be paid at time and one-half (I 112) the officer's regular
rate and shall be paid for all hours, or any portion thereof, in excess of eight (8) hours per day or
forty (40) hours per week. Any member who works a sixth (6th) day in any one work week shall
be paid for those hours at a rate of one and one-half the officer's regular rate. Any member who
works seven (7) consecutive days in any one work week shall be paid at a double-time rate for
the seventh (7'h) day. In an emergency situation, which requires off-duty officers being called in,
the regulars shall be given first choice. No overtime shall be worked unless assigned and
approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. The work week is defined as commencing on
Friday and ending on Thursday.
Officers required to work on their day(s) off shall be paid no less than four
Section 2.
(4) hours at time and one-half (I 1/2) the officer's regular rate, regardless of the time actually
worked. Employees ordered to return to duty to perform overtime work as defined above on a
regular working day shall receive not less than two (2) hours pay at time and one-half (I 1/2) the
officer's regular rate. For the purpose of this Article, a regular working day shall be the twentyfour (24) hour period commencing with the beginning of the employee's regular shift.
a.
Any off-duty officer who is required to appear in Court or before an
administrative agency, in performance of their official duties (and excluding Union business),
will be paid in accordance with Sections I and 2 of this Article. Officers shall remit to the
Department any witness fees received in conjunction with the subpoena.
Overtime pay shall not be subject to the minimum hour provisions in
Section 3.
Section 2 above when such overtime results from extending a tour of duty on any shift to
properly complete an investigation or work assignment
When an opening exists on any shift of four (4) or less hours, the opening
Section 4.
shall be first offered to a regular officer as overtime. If no regular accepts the overtime, then it
may be offered to a supernumerary officer as long as it is within the thirty-two (32) hour limit of
said supernumerary officer.
The Chief or his designee shall fill overtime assignments by offering the
Section 5.
overtime in four hour increments. An Overtime and Private Duty Hours list will be maintained to
distribute overtime and extra or special police duty assignments evenly. Records of accumulated
hours shall be maintained for a one-year period (fiscal year presently July I through June 30). On
July I of each year, all hours shall revert back to a zero figure. Overtime hours will be offered
starting with the officer in each group who has worked the least amount of hours according to the
Overtime and Private Duty Hours list and proceeding to the officer in each group who has
worked the most, in the following order, time reasonably permitting:
Group I

(007SS217.DOCXVer.l}

The officers working the shift preceding the affected shift to cover
the first four hours and the officers working the shift following the
affected shift to cover the last four hours;

13

Group 2

Remaining Inspector, Commanders, Sergeants, Detectives, and
Patrol Officers, including Community Policing Officer and School
Resource Officer;

Group 3

The supernumerary officers.

Section 6.
The call-in procedure in Section 5 i~ subject to the right of the OIC to
order in the officer with the lowest seniority on the shift preceding and the officer with the
lowest seniority on the shift following the affected shift, if no other officers volunteer. The
Commander/OIC shall, where practicable, notify the officer with the lowest seniority to stand-by
until it is determined if the assignment will be filled or if the officer will be ordered in. Officers
on a regularly scheduled day off; personal holiday, personal leave day, or vacation day will not
be ordered in unless the Chief deems it necessary. No officer shall be ordered into work twice
within one work week unless all other available senior officers have been ordered to work within
the same work week unless there is no other senior officer available.
Section 7.
Any and all overtime hours offered and/or work will be added to the
Overtime and Private Duty Hours list with the exception of supernumerary officers' overtime
hours. When an employee is ordered to work, the hours worked will not be placed on the
Overtime and Private Duty Hours' list. When an employee is on any granted day off other than a
regularly scheduled day off, the employee shall be asked to work but shall not be charged for not
responding or refusing.

ARTICLE 11
VACATIONS

Section I.
Employees shall be granted time off with pay for vacations according to
the following schedule:
One (I) year, but less than five (5)
years of continuous service

I 0 working Days

Five (5) years, but less than ten (I 0)
years of continuous service

15 Working Days

Ten (10) years, but less than fifteen (15)
years of continuous service

20 Working Days

Employees who are certified as full-time police officers on or before January I, 2016 shall be
entitled to twenty-five (25) working days off with pay for vacation upon having fifteen (15) or
more continuous years of service.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

14

Section 2.
Ten (I 0) paid vacation days shall only be granted when one (I) year of
continuous service is completed, and such vacation period shall not interfere with vacation
periods selected by other members of the force.
Section 3.
The vacation year shall be between July I and June 30 following, and each
employee shall be afforded the opportunity to be off on vacation within the year, however, if for
reasons of a service-connected disability (Workers' Compensation case) the employee is unable
to take his or her vacation within the vacation year stated above, said employee shall be paid for
all such unused vacation days at his straight-time rate of pay.
Section 4.
Departmental seniority shall prevail in the selection of vacation periods,
provided, however, that whenever a member fails to select a vacation period not later than June
I", he shall forfeit vacation choice by seniority for that year. He shall be entitled to select his
vacation period thereafter, and he shall be granted his choice of vacation period or periods
provided that such dates shall not interfere with the vacation selection of other members or be in
conflict with the operational requirements of the Department. No more than two (2) employees
shall take a vacation on the day, evening, or midnight slots (as set forth in Article 13, Section 2)
between April I and October I of each year, unless approved by the Police Chief or his designee.
The Department shall compile the choices of the members and post a copy of the vacation
schedule showing the employees' names and the vacation periods allotted not later than
September 15 1h. The Detective Division, Community Policing Officer and School Resource
Officer shall not interfere with the vacation choices of the patrol shifts. In order to utilize
vacation days individually, an officer shall make a request and seek approval of the Chief of
Police or his designee at least 48 hours in advance.
SectionS.
In no event shall employees who are entitled to four (4) weeks of vacation
have the right to take four (4) weeks during the period of June I to September 1. Vacations may
not be accumulated, except as otherwise provided for in Section 3, this Article.
Section6.
In the event that an employee who has earned unused vacation time either
retires or otherwise terminates his employment with the Seymour Police Department, he shall be
compensated for such earned unused vacation time at the prevailing rate of pay received by such
employee on the date of his termination. If an employee dies, the sums due him shall be paid to
his beneficiary or next of kin, in that order.

ARTICLE 12
SENIORITY
Section 1.
The seniority rights of all full-time regular members of the Department
shall be based on the length of service only, and shall be determined from the day such person or
persons were officially sworn to the Department as regular members.
Section 2.
Whenever more than one person is sworn in to the Department on the
same day, the seniority of such employee as it relates to other employees sworn in on that same
day shall be determined by the higher score on the certifying examination taken by those
employees,

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

IS

Section 3.
Until an employee has completed one (1) year of continuous service with
the Seymour Police Department, he shall not attain seniority and shall be designated a
Probationary Police officer. During that period, he or she shall be on probation and may be
terminated by the Board of Police Commissioners in its sole discretion for just cause, and neither
the employee nor any representative on the employee's behalf shall have recourse to the
grievance or arbitration provisions of this Agreement as it applies to termination. Upon
completion of this probationary period, an employee's seniority shall date back to the date of his
or her most recent swearing into the Department as a regular member.
Section 4.
Seniority shall not be broken by vacation, sick time, injury leave,
suspension, or any leave of absence with pay, or any call to Military Service for the duration.
Employees who resign voluntarily, or are discharged for just cause, or
Section 5.
have taken a leave of absence without pay for the purpose of working at another occupation,
shall lose all seniority.
In the event of a dispute between employees concerning any issues not
Section 6.
covered by the terms of this Agreement, all other things being equal, seniority shall prevail,
within rank or grade.
Section 7.
Department seniority as used in this Article is defined as the total length of
continuous service as a full-time regular police officer.
Section 8.
Rank Seniority as used in this Article is defined as the total length of
service of an employee as a permanent appointee to a rank.
Section 9.
In the event of a reduction in force, the employee with the least
department seniority shall be laid off first. If the Town recalls employees who were laid off, it
shall be by inverse seniority, with the most senior officer called back first.
ARTICLE 13
HOURS OF WORK

Section I.
The regular work week shall be forty (40) hours per week, eight (8) hours
per day, five (5) days per week, with two (2) consecutive days off at the end of each such forty
(40) hour week.
(A) All members shall enjoy their two (2) days off in consecutive order, provided that
if in the opinion of the Chief, there is an insufficient number of Regulars on duty during this
period, he may solicit volunteers amongst the Regular members of the Department to work on
their day or days off. If the Chief of Police is unable to obtain volunteers, he may then order an
off duty Regular member to work on his day or days off, and such member shall be paid for
such duty in accordance with the provisions of Article 10. Consecutive days off shall be given
in accordance with Section 8 of this Article.
Section 2.
(A)

The hours of regular shifts shall be as follows:
11:00 P.M. to 7:00A.M. (midnight slot)
7:00A.M. to 3:00P.M. (day slot)

{00755217.DOCX Yer. 1}

16

3:00P.M. to 11:00 P.M. (evening slot)
(B)
The Commanders shall pick their shift assignments and days off in accordance
with Section 8 of this Article and then the Sergeants will do so.
Section 3.
All work schedules shall be completed and posted on the Departmental
bulletin board not later than five (5) days in advance of the date when the working period
changes except for the working schedule of the Detective Division. The schedule of the Inspector
and Detectives shall be Monday - Friday 8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. with Saturday and Sunday as
regularly scheduled days off. This schedule may be changed by mutual agreement between the
assigned employee and the Chief of Police or Inspector. In lieu of receiving overtime pay for
overtime worked in the Detective Division, the Inspector or Detectives may elect to receive
compensatory time off at the rate of I Y, hours for each hour of overtime worked. These
compensatory hours may not exceed 40 hours total and must be used in the fiscal year they were
earned. Any remaining compensatory hours allocated to the employee as of June 30th will be
forfeited if not used prior to September I 51 of the next fiscal year.
During each eight (8) hour tour of duty, all members shall be allowed one
Section 4.
half hour for lunch. Lunch breaks shall be assigned by the Commander or his designee.
Section 5.
Once designated in the manner provided for in Section I of this Article, an
employee's days off shall not be changed during the work period without express approval of the
employee.
Section 6.
The Town and the Union agree that no Supernumerary (part-time) Officer
shall work more than thirty-two (32) hours per week, Friday through Thursday.
Section 7.
The Town and the Union agree that every shift shall be maintained at full
strength. "Full strength" shall mean a complement of five (5) sworn police officers from the
patrol division below the rank of Deputy Chief. The Detective Division, Community Police
Officer, and School Resource Officer shall not be counted toward patrol's minimum manning
requirements. When two Sergeants are assigned to the same shift, the Sergeant with the most
time in rank (seniority) shall supervise the shift and the second Sergeant shall work in the
capacity of a patrol officer at his/her Sergeant's rate of pay.
Section 8.
Four times yearly, each member shall pick his shift assignment and regular
days off by seniority in rank or grade. Vacancies in excess of four (4) weeks shall be cause to
rebid the shift assignment. It is understood on each of the three (3) regular shifts, there shall be at
least one (I) position which includes the regular days off of Saturday/Sunday, one (I) which
includes the regular days off of Sunday/Monday, one (I) which includes the regular days off' of
Friday/Saturday, and one which includes the regular days off of Tuesday/Wednesday. The
Commander and Sergeant working the same shift cannot both take any of the same regular days
off, and neither the Commander nor the Sergeant can pick Saturday/Sunday as his regular days
off unless one of them does not want either Saturday or Sunday as a regular day off. If bidding
process fails to fill all necessary shifts, the Chief shall make such further shift assignments by
inverse order of seniority, starting with the least senior officer. Each shift assignment selected
by seniority bidding shall remain in effect for thirteen (13) weeks from commencement.
Seniority shift selection shall be made during the month of June to cover the months of July,
August and September; the bids will take place in September to cover the months of October,
November and December; the bids will take place in December to cover the months of January,

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

17

February and March; the bids will take place in March to cover the months of April, May and
June. After the bidding period is closed, any vacancy on a shift created by special assignment,
promotion or resignation shall be filled by the most senior patrol officer who is eligible to bid for
it.
Section 9.
Community Policing Officer and School Resource Officer shall work
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and II :00 p.m. Their schedule shall include two consecutive days
off per week which shall be determined by the Chief of Police. Once determined at the beginning
of every bid process, their hours shall not be changed without fourteen (14) calendar days' notice
or mutual agreement.

ARTICLE 14
EXTRA OR SPECIAL POLICE DUTY
Section I.
The term "extra police duty" or "private duty job" for the purpose of this
Article shall mean police duty for which an employee is paid by some party other than the Town,
even though that employee may be paid through the Town, and including extra duty work for
other Town agencies.
Section 2.
All extra or special police duty assignments shall be made by the Chief of
Police or his designee. Those employees who desire assignment to extra duty shall notify the
private duty scheduling officer or his designee. An Overtime and Private Duty Hours list will be
maintained to distribute overtime and extra or special police duty assignments evenly.
Supernumerary officers and any non-bargaining unit Town of Seymour police officers will have
their extra or special police duty hours kept independently at the bottom of the list fef and shall
be labeled as "group 2." Records of accumulated hours shall be maintained for a one-year period
(fiscal year presently July I through June30). On July I of each year, all hours shall revert back
to a zero figure. Any new hire added to the Overtime and Private Duty Hours list after it has
already been posted shall be placed as the officer with the highest accumulated hours. Any
officer who returns to the list upon returning to work shall be assigned an overtime figure that is
equal to the highest and lowest number of hours worked divided by two.
Section 3.
All extra or special police duty assignments will be offered starting with
the officer in each group who has worked the least amount of hours according to the Overtime
and Private Duty Hours list and proceeding to the officer in each group who has worked the
most, in the following order, time reasonably permitting:
Group I.

Inspectors, Commanders, Sergeants, Detectives, Patrol Officers, Community
Policing Officer and School Resource Officer.

Group 2.

The Supernumerary (part-time) officers and non-bargaining unit Town of
Seymour Police Officers.

Group 3.

Any Agency mutually agreed to by the Union and Town as being eligible.

Section 4.
All extra or special police duty assignments other than those for
the Town of Seymour will be paid at time-and-one-half the Inspector's hourly rate of pay.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

18

Extra duty assignments for the Town of Seymour will be paid at time-and-one-half a Grade B
officer's rate of pay. A Town job is defined as an assignment for or to the Department of
Public Works, Board of Education, or Water Pollution Control Authority with no contractor
or subcontractor onsite performing work. Founder's Day and the downtown concert series
sponsored by the Cultural and Arts Commission are also Town of Seymour jobs. Any new
event that may be construed as a Town event will be mutually agreed upon by the Town and
the Union prior to the date of the event. Employees shall receive compensation for a
minimum of four (4) hours for four (4) or less hours of work once on the job site with
signature required. Employees shall receive compensation for a minimum of two (2) hours
when job is cancelled less than one hour prior to start and before officer arrives on the job
site. Employees performing "extra police duty" after II :00 p.m. and before 7:00a.m. shall be
paid an additional one dollar ($1.00) per hour. A car allowance of four dollars ($4.00) shall
be paid for the officer's personal vehicle if it is taken to the job site regardless of mileage.
Section 5.
The Town of Seymour and the Union agree that the following streets will
require Police traffic control:
Bank Street on Route 67
Roosevelt Drive
BungayRoad
Cedar Street
Derby Avenue
Fountain Lake Road
Great Hill Road
Holbrook Road
Maple Street

Mountain Road
North Main Street
North Street
Pearl Street
Rimmon Street
Rimmon Hill Road
River Street
Route 67
Skokorat Street

South Main Street
Squantuck Road
West Street

Section 6.
Issues of public safety shall remain within the jurisdiction of the Seymour
Police Department. The Police Department shall remain responsible for addressing public safety
issues on all roadways. Following proper protocol, when public safety issues necessitate, the
Chief of Police or his designee may require the posting of police flagmen on any road within the
borders of the Town of Seymour.
Section 7.
Payment for "extra police duty" as defined above, shall be in accordance
with the pay period in which it is earned. A pay period is defined as starting on Friday and
concluding on Thursday.
Any and all extra or special police duty hours offered and or worked will
Section 8.
be added to the Overtime and Private Duty Hours list with the exception of those hours that an
employee is ordered to work. An employee on a granted day off other than a regularly scheduled
day off who is asked to work shall not be charged for not responding or refusing.
Part-time officers working extra duty shall be paid at time and one- half
Section 9.
the full-time probationary officer's rate but otherwise are entitled to all of the provisions and
protections of Sections I through 8 of this Article 14.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

19

ARTICLE IS
PENSIONS
Section I.
Employees shall be covered under the provisions of the Connecticut
Municipal Employees Retirement Fund B; and, also, the Police and Firemen Survivor's Benefit
Fund. For the purpose of this Article only, employees shall be defined as all regular members of
the Police Department including the Deputy Chief and the Chief of Police.
Section 2.
All employees transferred from the Municipal Employees Retirement
Fund A to Municipal Employees Retirement Fund B, shall receive credit for all past service of
such employees.
Section 3.
In the event of the death of an active member or of a retiree until age 65,
the surviving spouse shall receive thirty-six (36) months of the current health insurance plan at
no cost.
Section 4.

All retirees shall receive a$ I 5,000 life insurance policy.

ARTICLE 16
RATES OF PAY
Section I.
Effective retroactive to July I, 2014, there shall be a general wage increase
in the straight time pay for full-time active officers of 2.0 %. This general wage increase will not
be applied retroactively to overtime pay or private duty job rates. The 2.0% increase will apply to
overtime pay and private duty rates commencing the first day of the first payroll week following
the date this Agreement is ratified.
Effective July I, 2015, there shall be a general wage increase in the straight time pay for fulltime officers of 2.49%.
Effective July I, 2016, there shall be a general wage increase in the straight time pay for fulltime officers of 2.49%.
Effective July I, 2017, there shall be a general wage increase in the straight time pay for fulltime officers of 2.49%.
Effective July I, 2018, there shall be a general wage increase in the straight time pay for fulltime officers of 2.49%.
Effective July I, 2019, there shall be a general wage increase in the straight time pay for fulltime officers of2.49%.
The hourly wage rates are as follows:

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

20

i'

Raise %
2013/2014

2019/2020

i

.

Probationary $
Probationary $

Probational) $
Probational) $
Probationaf'l $

'
Raise%

Current

2014/2015
2015/2016
2016/2017
2017/2018
2018/2019

$
$

CURRENT
2.00%
2.49%
2.49%
2.49%
2.49%
2.49%

2014/2015
2015/2016
2016/2017
2017/2018
2018/2019

2.00%
2.49%
2.49%
2.49%

2.49%
,,4Q%

Hou rl v: S I
aa!}
. Probatlonan · Grade B
Grade A
24.83 $
26.81 $
28.71 $
31.99
25.33 $
27.35 $
29.28 $
32.63

S~mer

•

28.03
28.72
29.44
30.17
30.92

$
$
$
$
$

30.01
30.76
31.53
32.31
33.12

$
$
$
$
$

33.44
34.27
35.13
36.00
36.90

Detective

$
$
$
$
$
$
$

Sergeant ; Commander: Inspector !

i

$
$
$
$
$
$
$

34.03
34.71
35.57
36.46
37.37
38.30
39.25

34.50
35.19
36.07
36.96
37.88
38.83
39.79

$
$
$
$
$
$
$

35.50
36.21
37.11
38.04
38.98
39.95
40.95

$
$
$
$
$
$
$

37.50
38.25
39.20
40.18
41.18
42.20
43.26

I

'

I S_a Ia~~~~-~"~---~-C I I t d t2080H ours W orkedYearIll
____Yeaq~
Probatlonarv: Grade B · Grade A
o.tectl~•
$ 55,764.80 $ 59,716.80 $ 66,539.20 $ 70,782.40
$ 56,880.10 $ 60,911.14 $ 67,869.98 $ 72 198.05
$ 58,296.41 $ 62,427.82 $ 69,559.95 $ 73,995.78
$ 59,747.99 $ 63,982.28 $ 71,291.99 $ 75 838.27
$ 61,235.72 $ 65,575.43 $ 73,067.16 $ 77,726.65
$ 62,760.49 $ 67,208.26 $ 74,886.53 $ 79,662.04

'

I<.,. ..,.,_

,.

•

Serg~~~t .! c(,~n\a~der r -~~i~~~ct~r

$ 71,760.00
$ 73,195.20
$ 75,017.76
$ 76,885.70
$ 78,800.16
$ 80,762.28

' '" , ''., '"""' I<

$ 73,840.00
$ 75,316.80
$ 77,192.19
$ 79,114.27
$ 81,084.22
$ 83,103.22

$ 78,000.00
$ 79,560.00
$ 81,541.04
$ 83,571.42
$ 85,652.34
$ 87,785.09

I< ._m.4o

'

*The Detective Sergeant's rate is five percent (5%) more than the Sergeant's rate.
Section 2.
Each full-time officer shall receive the following lump sum bonuses less standard
deductions and withholdings:
Two thousand dollars ($2,000) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal year that begins on
July I, 2015.
Two thousand dollars ($2,000) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal year that begins on
July I, 2016.
Two thousand dollars ($2,000) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal year that begins on
July 1,2017.
One thousand dollars ($1 ,000) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal year that begins on
July I, 2018.
One thousand dollars ($1 ,000) payable in the first paycheck of the fiscal year that begins on
July 1, 2019.
ARTICLE 17
HEALTH AND MEDICAL PLAN

Section I.
Through June 30, 2015, the Town shall provide each member with
complete coverage for the member and all eligible members of his immediate family, with the
cost being assumed by the Town, subject to the employee premium contributions described
below. The Town shall implement the administration necessary to allow employees to pay such
contribution with pre-tax dollars. Employees may select the Anthem Blue Cross/Blue Shield
Century Preferred Health Plan, or the Blue Care POS Health Plan.

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

21

Employees selecting the Century Preferred Plan shall pay:
•

Effective July 1, 2014: 9% of the premium cost, including riders, each year, up to
a cap of $1 ,824.00.

Employees selecting or enrolled in the Blue Care POS Plan shall pay:
•

Effective July 1, 2014: 8% of the premium cost, including riders, each year, up to
a cap of$1,274.00.

Until July I, 2015, all officers newly hired into the department will be covered
under the Blue Care POS Plan.
The Anthem Blue Cross/Blue Shield Century Preferred Health Plan and Blue Care POS
Plan with co-pay and deductibles as set forth in the summary plan description attached as
Appendix B, with the Blue Cross Vision Care rider and Prescription Drug Plan, Option I
(included in Appendix B). The Town will no longer be required to reimburse $2.00 differential.

High Deductible Health Plan
Effective July 1, 2015, the Town will offer only a High Deductible Plan (HDHP) for fulltime employees. All current full-time employees and their eligible dependents covered by the
Anthem Blue Cross/Blue Shield Century Preferred Health Plan, the Blue Care POS Health Plan,
or the HMO who want to continue to participate in the group health insurance offered by the
Town must switch to the HDHP effective July I, 2015.
The HDHP will have the following annual deductibles:
•
Deductibles shall be $2,000 individual; $4,000 for two-person or family coverage.
•
Deductibles are cross-accumulating and include all benefits covered under the HDHP
including prescription drug costs.
•
The Town shall contribute 50% of the deductible each of the last five (5) years of the
contract term payable as follows:
The Town's entire 50% share on or about July I, 2015; the Town's entire 50% share on
or about July I, 2016; and thereafter one-halfofthe Town's entire 50% deductible share (25% of
the total deductible) payable on or about July I and one-half of the Town's entire 50% share
(25% of the total deductible) payable on or about January I of each succeeding contract year
with the last 25% payment to be made on or about January!, 2020.
The Town's 50% deductible funding shall be made as a contribution to the employee's
Health Savings Account (HSA). Employees who make contributions to their HSA will do so
through deductions made from their weekly paychecks in such amounts as are authorized in
writing by the employee. Employee HSA contributions are pre-tax. Employees may elect to alter
their HSA contributions throughout the calendar year.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. 1)

22

For employees ineligible to contribute to a Health Savings Account, a Health
Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) shall be established by the employer and funded the same
percentage as a Health Savings Account (50% of the deductible). The HRA funds will be
available to the employee at the start of each plan year. HRA balances shall roll over year to year
up to the full deductible amount. HRAs are owned by the Town, and employees forfeit their
HRA balances at the end of their employment.
There are no prescription drug copayments due once the deductible is met.
Employee premium contributions for the HDHP will to be:
7/1115-6/30116
7/1/16-6/30/17
7/1/17-6/30/18
7/1/18-6/30/19
7/1119-6/30/20

0%
0%
4%
5%
6%

HDHP premiums are based on the equivalent fully underwritten (fully insured) rate, or, if
the employer should become self-insured, the allocation rate.
A summary of the benefits and cost share provisions of the HDHP plan is attached as
Appendix C.
(A)
The Blue Cross Vision Care rider is included in Appendix B. The Town will no
longer be required to reimburse $2.00 differential effective July I, 2015.

(B)

Blue Cross/Blue Shield Flexible Dental Program (enhanced flex dental plan with
unlimited non-orthodontic maximum and $1,000.00 lifetime maximum on orthodontics)
(attached as Appendix D),
(C)
The Town will provide a short term disability plan ("STD" plan), or its
equivalent, weekly income which shall be six hundred seventy five dollars ($675.00), life
insurance in the amount of one and one-half times salary and long term disability income
insurance.
(D)
All retirees and their eligible dependents will retain the same medical coverage
(including prescription and dental and vision coverage) they had on the day before the effective
date of retirement until the retiree and/or spouse reaches the age of 65. Should said medical plan
be a HDHP, the Town agrees to fund the HSA or HRA in the same manner and in the same
amount as it had on the day before the effective date of retirement. The Memorandum of
Agreement attached hereto as Appendix E is incorporated into and is part of this Agreement.
The Town will provide to retirees at and over the age of 65, and/or their eligible spouse
when he/she reaches age 65, Blue Cross 65 High Option and Blue Shield 65-82, or if that plan is
discontinued, the most comparable available Medicare supplement plan. The medical plan shall
not change for any spouse or other eligible dependent not enrolled in Medicare. Premiums for all
retirees and any eligible dependents shall be paid in full by the Town. Retirees shall have no

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

23

premium cost share during their retirement and will remain secure with the same policy
throughout their retirement as they were covered by on day one of their retirement, until they
reach age 65. Excluding retirees who were not covered by a HDHP on the effective date of
retirement, retirees and/or dependents who are not eligible to receive Blue Care POS shall
receive Century Preferred until the retiree and/or spouse reaches the age of 65.
Section2.
An employee may waive all group health insurance benefits and, in lieu
thereof, be remunerated in an amount of not less than 60% of the premium saved by the Town.
The savings shall be paid in two equal installments, in the first pay period in August and the first
pay period in December. An Officer may re-enroll during the open enrollment period or upon
retirement, provided the employee reimburses the Town on a pro rata basis for any overpayment
of the last waiver payment.
Section 3.
In the event it appears that the total cost of a group health plan offered
under this Agreement will trigger an excise tax under Internal Revenue Code §4980I ("Cadillac"
tax), or that the Affordable Care Act, its regulations, or any other State or Federal law otherwise
will materially increase the cost of the plan, either party may so notify the other party in writing,
and the parties will reopen the Agreement for the limited purpose of negotiating in good faith to
either modify the plan to avoid the excise tax and/or other increase in costs, or to change to a
comparable plan that provides the best overall benefits while falling below the excise tax
thresholds. The Town will not propose reducing the wage increases as part of any reopener
negotiations. The Union may propose increasing the agreed upon general wage increases (GWI)
provided for under this Agreement. The State Board of Mediation and Arbitration (SBMA) shall
retain jurisdiction over this provision in the event that bargaining fails to yield an Agreement.
If necessary, as provided for in the preceding paragraph, the parties will commence
negotiations in or around September 2016 or September of any subsequent year of this
Agreement. In the event that the parties fail to reach agreement by December 31, 2016 or any
applicable subsequent year, the issue will be submitted to final and binding interest arbitration
before Gerry Weiner or Peter Blum. The arbitrator must select the last best offer of one party or
the other.
Section 4.
The Town shall have the right to unilaterally change the group health
insurance plan to one that has substantially equivalent benefits overall. However, the
determination of what constitutes "substantially equivalent" must be bargained with the Union
and should such bargaining fail to yield an Agreement, the State Board of Mediation and
Arbitration
(SBMA)
shall
retain
jurisdiction
over
this
provision.

ARTICLE 18
ASSIGNMENT AS DESK OFFICER OR REPLACEMENT DETECTIVE
Section I.
When an officer is assigned as Officer-in-Charge (OIC) in place of a
Commander or Sergeant, the officer shall be paid at the Sergeant's rate for all time spent while
acting as OIC. This assignment shall be filled by the most senior officer working, regardless of
whether the officer is on his or her normal shift or working overtime.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

24

Section 2.
In the event of a temporary assignment in the Detective Division, it is
agreed that the assignment will not exceed ninety (90) days. Any officer accepting the temporary
assignment will receive the rate of pay assigned that position, except that a Commander or
Sergeant would continue to be paid at the Sergeant's regular rate.
In the event the list of those eligible to be assigned replacing a Detective has been exhausted
within a calendar year, the Town may then reassign from the list a second time in that calendar
year for additional ninety (90) day periods.

ARTICLE 19
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
Section 1.
Effective upon the signing of this Agreement, a shift differential of fifty
($.50) cents per hour shall be paid each employee who works second shift and one dollar and
twenty-five cents ($1.25) per hour for any employee who works third shift. However, in the
event that an employee commences his eight-hour shift during the second shift and concludes his
work day during the third shift, he shall receive the second shift differential for all hours worked.
These shift differentials shall be included in the next following pay check.

ARTICLE20
REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES
Section 1.
In the event an employee shall be required as a result of his official duties
to be out-of-town, he shall be reimbursed all parking and toll costs for which receipts are
presented, reimbursed at the current IRS rate for mileage if his personal auto is utilized and
compensated $10.00 per meal. A form provided by the Town, which verifies that an officer was
out-of-town on official police business, shall be a sufficient record for payroll purposes. It is
understood that this section shall not apply to an officer who volunteers for a long term out-oftown assignment. For purposes of this section only, "long term" shall mean in excess of a period
of two (2) months.
When an employee is required to travel in excess of 180 miles for
Section 2.
departmental business and/or training, the Town will be responsible for the cost of overnight
accommodations for that person,
Section 3.

Part-time officers are entitled to the protections of this Article.

ARTICLE21
PROMOTIONS
Section 1.
Promotions to the position of Inspector, Captain, Commander, Lieutenant,
Sergeant and Detective shall be made on the following basis:
Upon notice received by the Town or the Department that an officer is to retire, the Town
shall, within ninety (90) days of such notification, hold the written and oral examinations and
promote therefrom if such vacancy exists within that time. If the vacancy does not exist within
(00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

25

that ninety (90) day period, then it shall be filled from that list immediately upon the effective
date of the retirement. There shall be a minimum score of seventy percent (70%) for any of the
below listed areas of the promotional examination process. If no employee attains the seventy
percent (70%) threshold, the Town will retest as soon as practicable.
50% of final score to be based on a written examination given by an agency mutually
agreed upon between the Town and the Union.
35% of final score to be based upon an oral examination administered by three police
officers of Towns or Cities no less than 10 miles from the borders of the Town of
Seymour or mutually agreed between the Town and the Union. These officers shall be of
at least one rank higher than the position the examination is being held for and shall be
selected by the testing agency.
15% of final score to be based upon the average of two performance evaluations
completed by the Police Chief and Deputy Chief.
One-half (112) point shall be added to the employee's overall score for each full year of service as
a full-time officer.
Section I A. Any promotion made below the rank of Deputy Chief shall be made from
within the Seymour Police Department.
The Town shall be required to promote an employee from among the three
Section 2.
(3) employees who score highest on the examination. In the event that less than three (3)
employees are eligible in accordance with Section 4 of this Article, they must still take the
promotional exam, and the promotion must still be made in accordance with Section 4. The
promotional list shall be viable for one (I) year from the date it is posted.
Section 3.
An officer shall have three (3) years of service as of the date of the
examinations as a regular patrol officer in the ranks of the Seymour Police Department before
that officer shall be eligible for the examination and promotion to Detective or Sergeant. An
officer shall have first attained the rank of Detective or Sergeant before he is eligible for the
examination and promotion to the position of Commander and/or Inspector.
The Town of Seymour shall be responsible to provide and pay the entire
Section 4.
cost of all examinations.
Section 5.

Promotional Exams Procedure:

(A)

Job Descriptions based on the duties and responsibilities of officers currently
employed in the ranks being tested for shall be developed.

(B)

An agency mutually agreed upon by the Town and the Union shall then furnish
examination plans for each position being tested for. The Chief of Police or his
designee and the agreed upon agency shall review these plans and amend any
information not deemed adequate.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

26

(C)

Study Guides shall be issued to all candidates eligible for promotion no later than
thirty (30) days prior to the test which announcement shall be posted on the
Department bulletin board at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the written
examination.

(D)

A monitor shall be selected and hired to administer these exams. That person will
also be responsible for all completed test materials.

Any part-time officer who applies for and takes the test for a full-time
Section 6.
position with the Town will have one-half point for each year of service as a part-time officer
with the Town added to his/her final score.

ARTICLE22
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section I.
All members shall be provided with one identification card free of charge
during their employment with the Town of Seymour Police Department.
Section 2.
The Town shall repair or replace personal clothing up to $250; personal
jewelry, including watches and rings up to $1 00; the full cost of eye glasses; and the full cost of
dentures that are damaged and destroyed in the line of duty, except when caused by the neglect
of the Officers.
Section 3.
employees.

The Town shall make available, free of cost, Hepatitis B shots to all

Section 4.
Departmental Funeral Details shall be created by issuing a general notice
by requesting volunteers.
If any article or section of this contract is declared invalid for any reason,
Section 5.
such declaration of invalidity shall not affect the other articles and sections which shall remain
valid.
Section 6.
Effective July 1, 2015, an employee who has earned a college degree
from an accredited college or university, either prior to or after being hired by the Seymour
Police Department, shall receive a lump sum payment on or about December 1st of each year in
the following amounts:
Associates degree
Bachelor's degree
Master's degree
Doctorate degree

$ 500
$ 1,000
$ 1,500
$2,500

Section 7.
All books and pamphlets used in the Department In-service Training
Program shall be provided by the Town at no cost to the members attending. However, all such
articles issued or not used up, as the case may be, must be returned upon request by the Town.

{007552l7.DOCX Ver. l}

27

Section 8.
The Town guarantees Union officers and delegates a maximum of
seventy-two (72) hours of time off with pay annually to attend meetings, conferences, and
conventions, provided that at no time shall more than two (2) employees of the Department be
granted this privilege. Union officers and delegates that attend meetings, conferences and
conventions beyond the guaranteed seventy-two (72) hours of time off with pay annually, shall
be allowed to use holiday or vacation time to attend such meetings, conferences, and
conventions.
It is expressly agreed that should any conflicts arise between the language
Section 9.
and terms of this Agreement and either the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Police
Commissioners or the Town Charter, this Agreement shall take precedence,

The President of the Union or his designee shall be permitted to attend all
Section 10.
negotiating sessions if he is scheduled to be on duty at a time such negotiations are to be held
between the Town and the Union
Section II.
The Chief shall provide space for the Union to have a bulletin board
located in the Police Department for posting of notices concerning Union business and activity.
The Chief or Deputy Chief shall provide copies of up-to-date department
Section 12.
rules, regulations, and special orders to the Seymour Police Union President and members of the
bargaining unit.
Each employee shall, upon notice to the Town, have a right to review
Section 13.
everything in his personnel file, or any other file kept by the Town, regarding said officer. All
complaints against an officer which are in the file for three (3) months, and no action is taken
against such officer; shall be considered as unfounded and not be available for use against that
officer at a future date. Disciplinary actions against that officer which are not upheld shall be
removed from the personnel file and placed in the Internal Affairs files with said disposition
designated. Notations of suspensions or termination shall always remain as a permanent record in
the employee's personnel file. Written reprimands shall remain on file for two (2) years. The two
(2) years for all written reprimands in the file will commence on the date received. If a second
written reprimand is given during the two (2) year period, both written reprimands will stay on
file for two (2) years commencing on the date of receiving the second written reprimand. After
the two (2) years, the record of the written reprimand shall be removed from the personnel file
and placed in the department file, with a letter attached designating the reprimand as no longer
available for use.
Section 14.
Each employee shall be required annually to qualify in firearms training
within no more than two (2) sessions, on Tows time, at which times the Town shall supply and
pay for the ammunition. However; if the employee fails to qualify within the first two (2)
sessions, he must qualify within six (6) months thereafter on his own time and supply and pay for
his own ammunition. It is understood there is no limit in the number of attempts to qualify at
each session. It shall be the responsibility of each employee to maintain his/her qualification.
Section 15.

Performance evaluations shall be completed annually by the Department.

Section 16.
Once a year during the month of September, the Town will offer and
administer, at the employee's option, a physical fitness evaluation. The date of said test shall be
posted with at least 60 days' notice. Whenever possible, the evaluation shall be conducted in the
Department's weight room and at the Seymour High School track athletic complex. A Union rep

{007552l7.DOCX Ver. l}

28

will work with the Town for purposes of organization and administration. The evaluation shall
apply the Cooper Standards (Appendix F attached). Those employees successfully meeting said
standards will be paid the sum of $300. This section is to encourage employees to maintain
physical fitness and is not to be utilized to evaluate fitness for duty. The annual tests are not
mandatory, and injuries sustained by an employee while voluntarily taking such a physical
fitness test shall not be covered by workers' compensation.
ARTICLE23
ASSIGNMENT TO SPECIALIZED POSITIONS

Section I.
This Article provides the procedure for the assignment of Police Officers
to the specialized positions of Valley Street Crime, Statewide Narcotics, K-9 Officer, School
Resource Officer, Field Training Officer (FTO), and Community Police Officer.
Section 2.
Such assignments shall be made at the discretion of the Chief of Police in
accordance with the following procedure:
(A)
The opportunity for assignment to a specialized position will be posted on the
departmental bulletin board and qualified volunteers will be sought;

(B)
position;

The applicants will complete any specialized testing or training required of the

(C)
All applicants will be interviewed by the Chief of Police, the Chairman of the
Board of Police Commissioners and any supervisor in the bargaining unit.
Section 3.
Police Officers assigned to Valley Street Crime and Statewide Narcotics
will receive the Detectives' rate of pay during their assignment, except while working extra duty.
Assignment shall be for a two-year period. The officer shall receive one and one half (I 1/2)
hours of compensatory time off for every hour of work over forty (40) hours in a workweek or
eight (8) hours in a day. Any work in Seymour shall pay overtime as set forth in Article I 0. An
employee shall not exceed ninety (90) hours of accumulated comp time without approval of the
Chief or his designee. Comp time must be utilized prior to returning to duty at the Seymour
Police Department, unless otherwise prevented by an emergency. In that event, an employee
shall be paid for the unused accumulated comp time.
Section 4.
The K-9 Officer position shall be a patrol person, with two years of
experience at the Seymour Police Department, and shall serve a four-year assignment as K-9
officer unless the dog is rendered unfit. The K-9 Officer shall bid for his/her shift in accordance
with Article 13. The K-9 Officer shall have an hour per day, during his/her regular eight-hour
shift, to take care of the dog and the vehicle. The K-9 officer is eligible for overtime on the same
basis as other patrol officers. The Canine Officer shall be compensated with two (2) hours of
overtime pay at time and one half(! Y,) his straight time rate a week to cover the care of the dog
on his or her days off which shall not be added to his/her accumulated overtime hours. The
Town will pay for food and veterinary costs, necessary training and insurance coverage. The
Town owns the dog; the dog shall live at the K-9 officer's residence. The Town shall provide a
vehicle when available.

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

29

Section 5.
To qualify as an FTO, an officer must have a minimum of three (3) years
of service with the Seymour Police Department or, in the case of a lateral transfer, be certified as
an FTO at the time of hire. A FTO shall be paid a premium of $1.50 per hour when training a
probationary officer assigned to the FTO. In addition to the premium, each primary FTO will
receive one (!) day of compensatory time for each FTO assigmnent.
ARTICLE24
SHIFT SWAPPING

Officers shall be able to swap shift assignments on a one-to-one basis in or outside the
same workplace with the approval of each affected shift Commander's approval. The days off
shall be documented on the proposed swap form, and it shall be the officer's responsibility to
maintain records as to when the swap is scheduled.
The officers involved in the swaps understand that an officer who is caused to work over
forty (40) hours in one workweek or over eight (8) hours in a day by substituting for another
officer or swapping shifts will not have that time counted as hours worked for overtime purposes,
provided the substitution or shift swapping is on a voluntary basis. The record log will list the
regularly scheduled officer as working and list the substitute officer as working a swap in
parenthesis. Example: Officer A (Officer B working swap).
If an officer fails to show to work as designated in the swap agreement, the officer that
failed to report will have the privilege of swapping shifts revoked for six (6) months and the
officer that was regularly scheduled to work shall be docked the eight (8) hours pay.
In the event of an ordering in situation, the seniority of the officer regularly scheduled to
work shall be assumed by the officer working the swapped shift.
ARTICLE25
LONGEVITY

Section I.
Employees shall receive annually a special payment in recognition of
longevity of service. In the pay period immediately following an employee's anniversary of
completed years of regular, full-time service, each employee shall receive a payment equal to the
following percentage of the employee's then current annual base compensation:
Percentage
1.6%
1.85%
2.1%
2.6%
3.1%

Completed Years
At least 3 years, less than 8 years
At least 8 years, less than 12 years
At least 12 years, less than 17 years
At least 17 years, less than 22 years
More than 22 years
Section 2.

{00755217.DOCXVer.l)

Years of service shall be computed from the date of employment.

30

Section 3.
regular paycheck.

Longevity payment shall be made by check separate from an employee's

To be eligible for longevity payments, an employee must have been
Section 4.
certified as a full-time police officer on or before January I, 2016. Employees who are certified
as full-time police officers after January I, 2016 shall not be entitled to longevity payments.
ARTICLE26
ALCOHOL AND DRUG FREE WORKPLACE AND DRUG TESTING

Section I.

ALCOHOL AND DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY
PURPOSE

The purpose of this policy is to establish a workplace which is free of the negative effects
of alcohol and drug abuse. By accomplishing this task, the Town also seeks to ensure a safer,
more healthy working environment for all employees and to reduce absenteeism, tardiness, and
other job performance problems, which may be caused by alcohol and drug abuse. This policy is
adopted in accordance with the Drug Free Workplace Act.
STATEMENT OF THE POLICY
Employees shall not be involved with the unlawful manufacture, distribution, possession,
or use of an illegal drug, controlled substance, or alcohol, on or off Town premises, while
conducting Town business. Any employee who discovers illegal drugs on Town premises shall
notify the Chief who shall investigate the matter and notify appropriate Town officials.
If an employee is convicted under a criminal drug statute for violations occurring while
on Town business, s/he must report it to the Chief within five (5) days after the conviction, The
Town shall notify any federal agency awarding a grant to the Town, which requires notification,
of such conviction, within ten (I 0) days thereafter. The Employer shall meet with the employee
and representative before taking any further action.
Employees shall only use prescription drugs on Town premises which have been
prescribed by a licensed medical practitioner, and such drugs shall be used only as prescribed.
An employee shall, not consume alcohol on or off Town premises, unless approved by
the employer, (Christmas party, etc.] while conducting Town business. An employee who is on
duty shall not be under the influence of alcohol,
Violations of this policy may result in discipline if the employee does not agree to enter
the EAP or does not successfully complete the program established by the EAP.
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE
In most circumstances, the Town shall provide an employee with an opportunity for
rehabilitation in overcoming addiction to, dependence upon, or other problems with alcohol or
drugs.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. 1}

31

An employee who feels he or she has developed an addiction to, dependence upon, or
other problems with alcohol or drugs, is encouraged to seek assistance. Certain benefits for
alcoholism or drug addiction are provided under the Town's group medical insurance plan. An
employee will be given the opportunity to participate in a rehabilitation program which requires
absence from work for bona fide treatment. Such absence may be charged to the employee's
accrued and unused sick leave, subject to the provisions of the employee's collective bargaining
agreement or the Town's Personnel Rules and Regulations, as applicable. The Employer shall
make reasonable accommodations.
Any request for assistance with a drug or alcohol problem will be treated as
confidential.
Employees of the Police Department shall be enrolled in the POST Program.
Section 2.
The Police Chief or Deputy Chief may require an officer who is on duty to
submit to a urinalysis drug test where the Police Chief or Deputy Chief has reasonable suspicion
that the employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol which adversely affects or could
adversely affect the officer's job performance, but the Department may not take any adverse
personnel action against the officer on the basis of a positive urinalysis drug test unless the
Department has given the employee a urinalysis drug test, utilizing a reliable methodology,
which produced a positive result and such positive test result was confirmed by second urinalysis
drug test, which was separate and independent from the initial test, utilizing the gas
chromatography and mass spectrometry methodology. The Department will require prospective
employees to submit to urinalysis drug tests utilizing the methodology set forth above. The
results of any such test shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed by the Department unless
the positive result is the basis of disciplinary action against an officer. Otherwise, the result of a
urinalysis drug test shall be maintained along with the other employee medical records. The
provisions of this section shall not be arbitrarily applied to discriminate or retaliate against an
officer.
Section 3.

Part-time officers are entitled to the protections of this Article.
ARTICLE27
TRAINING

Section I.
Effective with the signing of this Agreement, any employee given training
on his/her day off shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at time and one-half the regular
rate of pay. The Town shall provide all mandated training, certification and re-certification as
required.
Section 2.

Part-time officers are entitled to the protections of this Article.
ARTICLE28
DURATION AND RENEWAL

Section 1.
This Agreement may be altered or modified only by a mutually written
agreement of the parties hereto.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

32

Section 2.
This Agreement shall be retroactive to the I" day of July, 2014, and shall
continue in full force and effect until midnight on June 30, 2020, and from year to year thereafter
unless written notice is served by either party to the Agreement no Jess than one-hundred twenty
(120) days prior to the expiration of this Agreement that modifications or changes be made in the
Agreement in which case the parties shall negotiate a new Agreement and shall schedule a
meeting within thirty (30) days for such a purpose.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused their names to be signed this 16th
day of March 2015.
FOR THE TOWN OF SEYMOUR

FOR THE SEYMOUR POLICE
UNION LOCAL #564, AFSCME,
AFL-CIO

BYc:?T

BY:

BY:~
BY:---------

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

33

APPENDIX A

STATE OF CONNECTICUT
POLICE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING COUNCIL
JOB DESCRIPTION
JOB TITLE: ENTRY-LEVEL POLICE OFFICER

GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES: Under regular superviSion, performs basic law
enforcement duties in accordance with the mission, goals and objectives of an employing law
enforcement agency and in compliance with governing federal, state and local laws.
ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS AND TASKS:

A.

Essential Function: Arrest and Detain Persons
Essential Tasks:
I.

Advise persons of constitutional (Miranda) rights.

2.

Apprehend and place juvenile offenders in custody.

3.

Arrest persons with a warrant.

4.

Arrest persons without a warrant.

5.

Execute arrest warrants.

6.

Plan and Organize service of arrest warrant.

7.

Complete necessary forms and affidavits to obtain arrest warrants.

8.

Request verification of warrants before execution.

9.

Obtain arrest warrant and/or make proper return.

1 0.

Exercise-discretion (choice) in selecting appropriate police action.

11.

Fingerprint suspects or prisoners taken into custody.

12.
Observe persons in custody to determine whether they are intoxicated or in
medical distress, mentally ill, retarded, etc.
13.

Take mentally deranged persons into custody for their own protection or that of

{00755217.DOCXVer. I}

34

others.
14.
Contact mental health resource (program, facility, etc.) to obtain help for
disturbed person.
15.

Book persons in custody by completing arrest and related forms.

16.

Check individual making bail for outstanding warrants.

17.
Examine physical condition/appearance of prisoners and/or persons in- custody to
assess need for medical attention.
18.
B.

Confer with prosecutor regarding or to obtain warrant authorization from judge.

Essential Function: Protect Crime Scene and Collect Evidence and Information
Essential Tasks:

I.

Secure crime scene, i.e. establish security perimeter.

2.

Analyze crime scene to determine need for specialist processing.

3.

Collect evidence and property from crime scene.

4.

Fill out, forms to document chain of custody of evidence.

5.

Examine evidence from crime scene to determine-relevance.

6.

Use drug test kit to test evidence.

7.

Package (bag and tag) evidence.

8.

Initial/Mark/Label evidence.

9.

Initial/Mark/Label recovered property.

C.
Essential Function: Enforce DUI/Traffic Laws and Investigate Traffic
Accidents
Essential Tasks:
l.
Administer field sobriety tests, e.g. Gaze NYSTAGAMUS, PBT, Standardized
Field Sobriety Test, etc.

2.

Arrest DUI or DWI suspects.

[00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

35

3.

Complete DUI or DWI arrest reports.

4.

Seize operator's license from motorist if blood-alcohol test is refused.

5.

Inspect vehicles involved in accident to assess damage, cause, etc.

6.

Search for and collect physical evidence at accident scene.

7.

Control spectator access at scene of police incident.

8.

Investigate accident to determine causes or factors contributing to an accident.

9.

Collect facts of accident to determine charges.

I 0.

Issue citation for violation in a traffic accident.

II.

Determine point or area(s) of impact or point or area(s) of occurrence.

12.

Hand sketch diagram of traffic accident.

13.

Direct traffic at scene of accident investigation.

14.

Follow agency procedures or state statutes to impound and inventory vehicles.

15.

Identify and inter-view owners and- others involved in traffic accident.

16.

Locate and interview witnesses to traffic accidents.

17.

Use measuring device to measure traffic accident scene, e.g. skid marks, etc.

18.

Assess need for and organize emergency assistance for traffic accident (e.g.

wrecker, ambulance, sand truck).
19.

Take measurements at a traffic accident scene (e.g., triangulation, baseline, etc.)

20.

Arrest reckless operators.

21.

Review/Consider facts of case and State Motor Vehicle Code to select most

appropriate charge and/or enforcement action.

22.

Make custodial traffic arrest.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

36

D.

Essential Function: Operate Patrol Vehicle
Essential Tasks:

I. Engage in high speed response driving in congested area.
2. Engage in high speed response driving off road.
3. Engage in high speed pursuit driving on open road.
4. Engage in high speed response driving on open road.
5. Operate patrol vehicle in driving rain.
6. Operate patrol vehicle on dirt/gravel covered road.
7. Operate patrol vehicle on ice/snow covered road.
8. Operate patrol vehicle at night.
E.

Essential Function; Execute Motor Vehicle Stop
Essential Tasks:
I.

Execute stop of motor vehicle and approach and talk to operator and passengers.

2.
Observe operator's eyes, body movements, actions, etc. to evaluate his capability
to operate vehicle.
3.
Activate emergency equipment and direct violator vehicle out of moving traffic to
execute traffic stop.

F.

4.

Direct offending vehicle out of moving· traffic to execute felony stop.

5.

Watch occupants of stopped vehicles to identify unusual or suspicious actions.

6.

Execute felony motor vehicle stop.

7.

Stop vehicles to investigate, warn or arrest occupants.

Essential Function: Conduct Search and Seizure
Essential Tasks:
I.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

Conduct full search of arrested persons.

37

5

2.

Conduct frisk or pat down.

3.

Handcuff suspects or prisoners.

4.

Search automobile under independent probable cause.

Search automobile incident to arrest.

6.
Conduct warrantless search of premises or property in hot pursuit, with or without
consent, incident to arrest, etc.
7.
G.

Seize contraband, weapons and stolen property from suspects.

Essential Function: Use Physical Exertion/Force
Essential Tasks:

I.
if necessary.

H.

Restrain unruly or violent individuals, remove from public areas and effect arrest

2.

Break up fights between two or more persons.

3.

Use holds or devices to control or take suspect down.

4.

Subdue physically attacking person.

5.

Use weaponless defense tactics.

6.

Subdue person resisting arrest.

7.

Grip person tightly to prevent escape/control movement.

8.

Disarm violent armed suspect.

Essential Function: Use Deadly Force

Essential Tasks:
I

Participate in firearms training.

2.

Carry authorized firearm when off duty.

3.

Clean and inspect weapon.

4.

Discharge firearm in low light conditions, e.g. at night, in darkened room, etc.

5.

Discharge firearm at person.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

38

6.

Discharge firearm from protective cover position.

7.

Draw weapon to protect self or third party.

8.

Detain person at gun point.

9.

Clear malfunction of various firearms.

10.

Reload firearms under combat conditions.

1I.

Fire weapon in dark environment while using flashlight.

12.

Discharge shoulder weapons, e.g. rifle, shotgun, etc.

I.
Essential Function: Conduct Initial Investigation of Various Crimes and
Events
Essential Tasks:

1.

Administer cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR).

2.

Administer mouth-to-mouth -resuscitation.

3.

Apply basic first aid to control bleeding.

4.

Apply basic first aid -to -treat for amputations.

5.

Apply basic first aid to treat for diabetic reaction.
6.

Apply basic first aid to treat for electric shock.

7.

Apply basic first aid to treat for gunshot wounds.

8.

Apply basic first aid to treat for heart attack.

9.

Apply basic first aid to treat for stabbing or puncture wounds.

10.

Apply basic first aid for choking, e.g. Heimlich Maneuver.

II.
Help evacuate areas endangered by explosive or toxic gases, liquids, or other
spilled materials.
12.

Place barricades on roadway to protect or secure area, vehicle, etc.

13.

Recognize signs of suicide risk in prisoner/arrested person.

14.

Talk with persons attempting to commit suicide to get them to delay or stop their

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I)

39

attempt.
15.
Use protective gear to prevent contact with infectious diseases, blood- borne
pathogens, etc.
16.
gloves, etc.

J.

Put on and take off emergency protective gear; e.g. breathing apparatus, gown,

17.

Observe individual to recognize signs of mental illness.

18.

Take control of publicly intoxicated/disruptive person.

Essential Function: Conduct Initial Investigation of Various Crimes and Events
Essential Tasks:

I.

Interview complainants, witnesses, etc.

2.
Listen closely to interviewee, suspect, etc. to ensure full understanding of person's
words.
3.

Conduct neighborhood canvas to collect-crime-related information.

4.
Conduct intelligence activities, e.g. computer checks, backgrounds, on known or
suspected offenders.

5.
suspect.

Conduct field or scene one-on-one "show-up" with victim or witness to identify a

6.
Talk with law enforcement personnel to obtain or provide assistance in
investigations and to exchange information.

K.

7.

Interrogate/Interview suspects.

8.

Recognize and define elements of individual criminal charges.

9.

Conduct initial investigations of various criminal and non-criminal events.

Essential Function: Write and Read Reports and Other Documents
Essential Tasks:

I.
Write in-depth narrative reports containing complete sentences and paragraphs
(e.g., investigative reports, supplemental/follow-up reports).

(00755217.DOCXVer. I}

40

2.
Prepare arrest-related paperwork, e.g. Prosecutor's Report, Custody Form,
Officer's Statement, etc.
3
Write down sworn confessions or other sworn statements from suspects, victims,
and witnesses.
4.

Describe in written form the location of physical evidence at scene.

5.

Summarize in writing the statements of witnesses and complainants.

6.

Read reports, legal papers, etc. to maintain knowledge of law enforcement work.

7.
Read court and legal papers to determine meaning and proper law enforcement
response, e.g. domestic violence orders, restraining orders, etc.
8.

Read/Review warrants and affidavits to ensure completeness and accuracy.

9.

Record in writing the circumstances related to issuance of traffic citation.

l 0.
practice.

Conduct legal research in state and local laws, etc. to determine proper charges or

II.
Read and comprehend Department Policy and Procedure and apply same to law
enforcement practices.
12.
Fill out affidavits and reports to document citizen's complaint.
l 3.
L.

Write field notes to record actions, interviews, etc.

Essential Function: Present Evidence and Testimony

Essential Tasks:
I.

Confer with prosecutor prior to testimony regarding case.

2.

Read/Review case reports and notes to prepare for court testimony.

3.
Present evidence and testimony in legal and administrative proceedings, e.g.
Preliminary Hearing, Trial, Grand Jury, etc.
M.

Essential Function: Intervene in and Resolve Human Relations Problems/Conflicts
Essential Tasks:

l.

Intercede in-domestic disputes to resolve maintain peace, protect persons, etc.

(00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

41

2.

Enforce restraining/protective order under Connecticut Domestic Violence Law,

3.

Use voice and words to calm a situation, send message, etc.

4.

Talk with families of juvenile suspects or defendants to advise, notify, counsel,

etc.
5.
gatherings).

N.

Control hostile groups (e.g. demonstrators, rioters or bar patrons, social

6.

Speak confidently to project control, self assurance, etc.

7.

Maintain control of oneself as many people speak to you simultaneously.

8.

Maintain personal calm to prevent making situation worse.

9.

Offer alternatives to resolve conflict between disputants.

10.

Use body language to project control and influence situation.

11.

Observe person's body language to assess attitude. intentions, etc.

12.

Use voice commands to project control and direct action.

Essential Function: Perform General Patrol Duties
Essential Tasks:

1.

Use flashlight, illuminated baton or hand signals to direct traffic.

2.

Look for and identify suspect vehicle by color and description.

3.

Observe moving vehicles to identify possible criminal activity, e.g. Drug Profile.

4.
Look at insignias, tattoos, clothing and their colors to identify possible gang
affiliation, criminal suspects, etc.
5.
transport)

Inspect patrol vehicle for weapons and contraband (e.g., before and after prisoner

6.

Smell and investigate unusual odors.

7.

Monitor department radio communications to stay aware of police activity.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. 1)

42

8.
Observe crowds at. large gatherings (e.g., concerts, fairs, athletic events, strikes)
to detect problems or illegal activity.
9.

Perform law enforcement duties in all weather and temperatures.

I 0.

Speak to hostile groups to quiet them.

II.

Transport prisoners.

12.

Describe persons to other officers (e.g. suspects, missing person).

13.

Prepare request for emergency evaluation of individual.

14.

Direct actions oflaw enforcement or public service personnel arriving to assist.

15.

Guard arrested persons outside of detention facility.

16.

Respond t6 and control scene involving barricaded subject.

17.

Conduct field interview of suspicious person.

I 8.

Investigate suspicious vehicle.

I 9.

Maintain courteous relationship with citizens to foster positive relationship.

2 0.

Behave in a positive and fair manner to develop and maintain trust relationship

with citizenry.
21 .

Use police radio equipment to communicate.

2 2.

Search for person in darkened building or environment.

23.

Hold flashlight while performing various law enforcement duties.

{00755217.DOCXVer.l}

43

EQUIPMENT LIST
EQUIPMENT USED TO PERFORM OR IN
PERFORMANCE OF ESSENTIAL TASKS
I.

Automobile

2.

Body Armor (hidden vest, exterior vest)

3.

Breathalyzer/Intoximeter

4.

Business Directory

5.

Pepper Spray

6.

Car door lock opening device

7.

Drug and Narcotic l.D. Field Kit

8.

Side-handled baton, e.g. PR 24

9.

Fire extinguisher agents

10.

Gasoline Pump

II.

Blood-borne pathogen protection equipment

12.

First Aid Kit

13 .

Road Flares

14.

Flashlight

15.

Flexi-cuffs

16.

Handcuffs

17.

Hand-held police radio (Walkie-Talkie)

18.

Manual traffic control device

19.

Public Address System

20.

Traffic Cones

21.

Alley light

22.

Radar unit

23.

Semi -automatic pistol

{007SS217.DOCX Ver. I}

44

24.

Shotgun

25.

Spotlight

26.

Stationary computer terminal

27.

Police vehicle radio equipment

28.

Typewriter

29.

Suspect ID camera

30.

Print roller

31.

Lights and sirens

32.

Marking chalk

33.

Rubber gloves

34.

Tape measure

35.

Battier tape

36.

Ballistics body armor

37.

Ammunition/magazine/clip

38.

Weapon cleaning equipment

39.

Fluorescent vest

40.

Telephone equipment

{007SS217.DOCX Ver. I}

45

APPENDIXB
CENTURY PREFERRED AND BLUE CARE POS PLANS

(

Unlimited Office Visit Moximlll!l
Unlimited Offioo Visit Maximum
Out ofNelWork:
Out of'Ne!Work
Subject to deduonb1e and
Subject to deduotlblelllld
coinsuranoo
oolnsumnee
Deductible $2501$750/$750
DeduCtible • $200./$400 /$500
Cqlnsurano~ 80!(. to
I""",,.....,· Max: $1,500 !nd.-$4·,5010 1
$4,0001$8,0001$10,000
l:'am.
Cost Share Max:
Lifetime Maximum ln-Networl<:

$~:~~?!~;~~~rnitcdl Lifetime Maximum
Unlimited
Out ofNetw01k:

ILil~>e~' IMlot

$1,000,000

Lifetime Max Out ofNetwolk

Newborn to 1 }'I'· 6 exams

Newborn to 1 yr • 6 exams
1year through 5 yeats - 6 exams
6 years tluuugh 10 years ·I every2 6 yeats through 10 yea!s -1 every 2
I year through S yeats • 6 exams

yean
II years through 21 yeats • 1 pel'
year
$10 Copoy o~ all above e:u"'s
Out ofNetwotk

{00755217.DOCX Vee. I)

46

years
11 years tlunugb 21 years ·l per
yea!·
No Copay on all above exams
Out ofNetwork

(

Covered once ov<>~:y 24months
$10
(lnc)udos rofiactlon)
ot'Notwork

Covered once every 24 months
NoCopay
Out ofNetwork

Out ofNetwork
80% after annual deductible
Specialist In Netwotk $10 Copay
Out ofNetwork

Out ofNetwork
80% after annual deductible
Specialist In Network $10 Copay
Out ofNetwotk

Cove~ed up to SO combined

Subject to medical necessity based

c

u.atments
per member per calendar year

(00755217.00CX Ver. I}

Out of network· 80% after

on infolmation obtained from your
health care provider
Out ofNetwork ·· 80% after·

tesilng
No copay for injections
(1teatment Plan Reqttired)
Out ofNetwork
80% after deductible

tesfing
No copayforlqjections
(Treatment Plan Requiied)
Out ofNetwork
80% after deductible

47

c

li>jections
In Netw<>rk: Covered

f!Jieotions
l'n Network: Covered

0Qt ofNetwork
80% after deductible

Out ofNetwork
80% after deductible

lupatient
Medical
Services

In NetwoJk: Co'lle!<d

In Network: Cove.t<d

Out ofNetwoll<
80% after deductible

Out of Network
80% after deduotlble

Surgery Fees

1n Network: Covered

In Network: Covered
Out ofNetwo1k
80% after deductible

Dlaguootlc Lab
&X-r11y

Out ofNetwo1k
80% after deductible.
~:tl..!.\ ) j\'
L-

--

Ji " · ~~t~lll\'' 1:\,,_lr-Jv FUlfil,~~-:. JL~,

l~)ITj ..(l 'Vi':,Jw~~. -

---

-

In Network: Covered
Out ofNetwodc

(

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

,

48

---,
·___:::~

(

I1Medlcatlo11S/Snoullesl
Psyc.hlatric
In Notwo1k: $0 pel admission

In Network: $0 pet' admission

Out of'Network 80% after deductible Out ofNetwoJk 80% after deductible
Substance
Abuse
Detox

In Network: $0, per admission

ln Network: $0 per admission

Out ofNetwork 80% after deductible Out o!Ne!work 80% after deductible

Out of netwoJk 80% after deductible

(

Subject to deducijble and 80%

up to
No
per admission copay

t(j~~~~li•'_::,}'l;,:iloi.$1Jf,;-~ •~"-

Durable
Medical
Equipn>ent

ProsthetiM
llome Bealth

{00755217,DOCXVer, I}

"

---

-- ---

'"

I
---"In Netwo1k:
20% Copay Max $1,000

-~ _l

In Network: Covered

~

Out ofNetwoxk 80% after deductible
Limited to Specific Items
Limited to Specific Itoms
Out ofNetwork- Not Covered
In Network: 20% Copay Max $1,000
ln Network: Covered
Out ofNetw01k 80% after deductible Out ofNetwork 80% after deduCtible
In Network: Covered up to 200 Vlsits

49

In Network: Covered

(

p<r

calendaJ· ye11r
Includes Infusion Therapy
ofNetwotk 80% ler dledu·otlble I Out of Network: 80% after a $50
81'

eye exam

eyeoxam

$28.00 ~Ol tiames
$36.00 fo1·frame.s
$3.3.50 for single prescripdon lenses $48.40 for single prescription lenses
$52.00 for blfooals
$59.20 for blfooals
$84.00 fortlifooals
$80.00 fol'tdfooals
00 for contact lenses when
for contact lMses when
to oorroot
to OOli'COt
acuity to 2ono
acuity to zono
$33 . 50 for contact lenses when used $48:40 for contact lenses when used

c

PMSClUPTlONDRUG PLAN- OPTION QNE
Genetic I
Listed :Srand
Non Liated Brand
PharmacY Dav Limit
Ph111macy Maxfmwn
Elected Brand
Non-Par Claims
Mall Order
MOD Day Limit
MOD Maximum

{00755217.DOCXVer. I)

$5
$10
$20
34 dav -100 Wlit dose
Unllmited

n/a
20%
$0
100 davs
Unlimited

50

~

APPENDIXC
HDHP PLAN SUMMARY

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary

Anthem... W

The llll!li'rl)!'". HSApb11il:ttniand tD i!I'P7,.n}11u tu hkt controf 01)'iM btf!UJ, i15Welln
tne dO:llafS )'01 ~Jenf on'fQtlrtlealt cart lbiS plengtlet )"CU me beMftlliyoiiY.'tlbld rl.alve
fnma t:t'lcEII"ealtb pin plus h!altb em clllla/S to spml Yllllf wa)'.W ~llu'l' tun
la:ld:sla pencnal!zet! serrim a~~ 1111lhe ho·s 1o hElp yuu rEach ~ heallh !))b!nffal.

Rrtt -use )'011' 'iiSA to P'1'l roo oovt'"ed H!"Jfoes.

Health SaVIngs Account
Win 1M Llln!nos HIOIIk &n<ngs -..t (HSAI, ... ..,
~ P'f{ali~brs ID y:t,~rHM ~ Ofws nuy ii.Pl
cc:tJIJibLR ~to }'W' il=cowr:l Y011 e.m use i'ese cbllil5 to
meet tp.ll il'lf!U31 delb::tlblt ftSPO!'Jibill:y. 'Urr.aed ddlars
~ bt sn'ld or in1'5ild ancl m~CW~~Iia:t- "I'C!.IJh l'ftirttn&n'~

Conlributlons to Your HSA
For Zl~5. ~aft!. e.v b! rr.atl! to yCt.r J.:SA 14' to ile biiJwhg::
$3.,,350 ~I C0\"1'3fi

Earn More MooeyforYour Account
Vllms speda,' ~)'N l.J.nMrlosHSAj:iMisk. yw 11\l)'

HeallhyRew.nls
If_you do thit:
Y011 can Nl'ft thi$ iftyour H8A:
Coqllite tM Heaf.f!. Asseuntarl o~Ii~.e
$9:1
EP.to1 ~ ~ F&"Solii ·~yt, Co<dl Pfc9rarn
S.too
Sl'3i.Jm. m th! ?HSCM HNB!. ~ FrQgl'3rn
1200

11e•

Ei!f'l'l~t-Corycwh~<lOOO'iritl'Wghlhi

Hea:lky R~Nfol"ds ilo;nlhoe JrQ,-m.

S6,!!5G -~-·

T~'eZodrllfnelll=dfloqllf,e.He*yRsfttii'09'1:-,yw~

Co-

)'!)lo.,e."'Ch.f'is~:pll'i'Bl

&-.elgi:ily~o,oe~~.Sepe~2~·~m~~V!..

M.vu11 coentt5oh,t~~ ~Eelf~O' NT r«'c> o..~ll:IWJ'I ...nm

c.,.,..""""""

<WSn»ldog
CorrpktRwrViti'ftt.\:rag9'TII!I!t?rcg"iJ'T'

s;o
$50

Pf.IJI- Lohelpyoulla)'kea~y, use:

Preventin ewe

l'revtirtiveCaro

~00%0Mnlttfot n:llionally ~ded !el\"ots.
!Muted n 1M p~t o:tte 5e"VicE5 t1ot mett !fie

--

recr.i'eii"I'!!I'G d.fldml N stiR liM', irdnfng 0!!~

~,i'J!rniiUz::JiiaM3'Ml:phy5datWsits.

v.... Bridge Responslblllty

Ths-Sri'dp is irl ~pi Fllf~OI)Wl'pocbt:omi )'011

ms)W..W~e Mpi:fG'bfity. Ywr)riii:Jt;m:~IIT.
,;IIViiiYthpencfftJOI!lhCM"nmrtaf)'OLI' HSAcb~ iia~y,
)')lldiOOHlO.Wi>htlp)'OII-)'OU'liiiiiiQI-li

~l:y.lf~IXll'tii)JteHSAil:f;a!S~:O'NamD'.r.l:ef

)'OI,l'lftct.ldil:i{e ill'ltliUH~ y»Sridge Wl1 eq&0\$0_
HSA.elolbrs spe!!t«! Ol7iii"N Ml\".ces pllol5 Y".M' 9f.dg:e
repmdlirr.y adll gpw )'011' ati'Vii ~e N'!p)m"'bilt:;.
HNHh Accomt +Bridge = Deductiblt
WNNdtd-

Traditional Health Coverage
Yu il'JftN Hta161: Co\•mgi' begiu t:Jiter )'JII hm~ nEt
)WrBri<ite_,;blily.

'lo~MfrcmlhiHSAaoli-cd~c:oibifiJr)'tiU~lCI'Ifi15}":1U

o!'eOeive y.nl' poeverf.fl.-e t;;l'l! frcrn m in"MtYo'at ,a'lider.If }'ml c:ftoose :0
ge :0 ar!. Clt.-IJfoftetrmk FOI.ider, )W' Gelt.dible Ot TQ!ffm;i l.feiith
Coverlgebenef.ts P.ill <¥'~·

Bridge
Ycu Sl"dte teSJOt!Sik<Trly"~! \'Gr}'.
AnnoalDsOOcdblaR_.il>1ly

u,ooo m.m~~n1 """""'
$4J100

""'ly -·

Traditional Health Coverage
AfteryOI.I"bridgt, the p~paya:
I:>3~ br in-~F.-iwolt pf'O'!idel'S

If vau h;}Ve questions, please call toll-free 1-888-224-4896.

f.AJ..41A

(00755217.DOCX V". I}

CC-HSMC6w1 ii'\C~ 1X1p3y!i NGF (!114)

51

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary

Anthem.•t

·-1

Y<»t...,.,"' ......... )OIIoih _ _ _ _ ii)QI'IG\trllo-..

•LYou .... )Oirilmiy_COI.,.... ... Hoalh~<»t-lolll ........ ~h<!>-IW-Qo.e..Ubrily_ls....,.IDao$50h)QI'HSA,.......,,.... n. _ _ _ J!U..,...IssOWJ!r•l'wlonoi-Caodl:IJ!U..-Jrbllo-HoalhCaidll'lopom,)IOIII _ _ _ flona,...ali-rogillnol

-Coodl""""'f<M_,...__ ,...,..,.

ruwl>llllp)OU._. _ _ _ _ ...,._W'"I'dllnlodm-,.....,,.,..,...,~lllocii-IEII
....,. .... _ . Yo>~l.-Stooin)QI'_tr...,.,inllo-

Yall-llOOb_,..,...-.,... .. lfllliiali'gkmh--Caidl~(a!t- ................... ,..,.

•-.v -l'logram:llis_. llllpsJOII._.,._"""*'""' idrifyt9;orl ""loolll--.rdsllilsi>""'*'

.._.M.........,is'F'"IDJ0111ifld)Oir_!my_OI018ot_,..,_......ri'IOWQI!""taols,i>:Ut!tillino)b.,....Hs

.......... ~""""'i''- Ycu;ni)QI'-ftagille ID-tlilinJ<U HSA(""-...

...,......

'*""...

·\'lo91t~l'n>pll:O.YoW¢Ioti1rogoiiW!Iflogr;mioa,.,..,......"""'...,....,....tollllp)OUildqii~<M9s

.....,gyiDiose,.;,;t ... _MigNbso.A_d_(;......,__..., _ _,..,_.,.;,MigNIN+m
""""'""'......., ~ei61g.
....,.....,..,.t, . ,.....
-l!lMI)of25criiFor~~t ....,.""'"'""""" v... .,,....,...,.elgJIIOIDNIOiiietlilinJ<UHSAt-.....,.
............ ~b ............ _

""""'adiilit""....-,

"""-•Boolr"""

Ytlun,..._.IDJ.......,., """-

To-.i.nlsti!NIIIhoLI]hlilllltt'. . . . JIIII.rnalhHrlftop.'IHM'IIti.III:IIIIWtrwllnht_.hai;IW:ilyu..,..,.~'PitU.

--my

PmlonllveCln
-sl"""""HSA"'""""',_sef\UsNWIIIOi. . llylloU.S.-..o-Tostfo<o, ...
Society, toeMi.!cxyec.m;tloe"' .............. -.(ACIP) .......
Tht-C... lionel!

d-.

-C"""

ildvdes"'""""bests,-w....,,.IOig.....,..IIMigriedm-wniO...--..IDpoM~~~...-•

.......... ;,py, ..... ""' ....

I>J,..._
- · · W}OII,..,.,cul-ol-..-, ....,

-ltOOiviidmiili~,_

.. ,....,. .. ,_,.,.,.._r..m,.,HSAanlclo ... iOPPIYlD-

'fO'J'-Io<l'out-oi..,. _ _ ~YoUI """·

l"N foi!Mfnt Is iJ list d O'J¥tPtcf pteYei'IM Cil't- ser'ficeos:

w.11 Bo~>y'""w"' a.11o1

-..c...

Adul~c..

Ollico .,oito tvou;. agel&; ilcWng ,......... ,;,;., """"·

Office Vilillt after- Olglt18; n::tuli"l ,evri.oe 'l'iskrl eD'II5.

ScniRDgT..W kl Wsion 1 ...,;,.g, WINd flJIOW'. Nso

Scnonl!gTIItlrot""'"""'-""""""l'"'""-..,

cckftdal aw:~r, pro~tate GU'ICft, c1.-.s, n ostlcfomii.Nsc
~ miiiM'ID!riiiM, as Will as JM!fvictXiil'hS, ~tHtill'ld
....~ """"JUUI'!i'l

_......,....,, P'l'llsiiM-iwlliillii!l.....,llot
ftm;lres 'ttllo are att 18, 01 ao..n. btttl Hll.dDy activt.
lmmuniutionl:
HepotitisA
Hep11titisB

llnautiDtionl:

He,.;llisA

~ T...,us,P-.Is(lJiaP}

~B

......,._.., ....

-(-pax)

""""""""~ (pneim>lia)
Hum;on ""'"""' .,.., (HPV)- ""'"" ......

- C a M * (loielmai1o)

Palo

..... """""" \INS (HPV) - - cancor

v"""•(-pax)

[ljlldilri~ T...,..., P-si5 (1JiaP}

.......,_.,shal

H.-t)!ie~

-.~Riioe>i{loiNRJ

rt you have question~, plea~e call ton-tree l-!188-224·4896.
CGHSA6015

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

52

w"'

Rx O)jiOys NGF (VI4)

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary

Anthem..,
Lumen~

'•llllll~~

o'

'•''"''!':, .... \'k••

(l;

to rod

llodicaiC.~

a,_.._....

NflvllrislwnMOS HSA ,rmtcovers aMI,.... dmtd'calseMotsto lrdanilnft5 wi;l.l)'. Ycu03t'l
HSAf\11115
ID,..,b~... - - OoaiJCU"""" .. IDI""._
JCUoillhMT--

•IIDftilr--,

Cowtotemiol>lolohoilt,..,b--somcos.
Tho fol,.;,g i1

o"""""' o / -. . - "'*<s- Anlhom'>

.

• Plvfsic:ia'l Olct Visits

L11na1oi HSA"""'
•Motomilyco.t
• O.iqlooof<>Qoe

~-Hosjoit.l• Olipolert
s..go.y _,.,

-

• OiogN>sic X••i•II•HHb
• Emetgelcy Hosp!al• ~-ft01ij>o1itnt_H_ani1So.llof.lnoe ,;,..,.

•"'"""*"'

llNgs

• Home healtl COlt il'ld h05Jiiot cart
• f'hy!i:ol,~ oml ~I Th....
' ~- Eqoipollftl

y-

• Skf'ecf r'Ur'i;,g fildfiy Wfl'iletS &meal to 120 cbys , .. caleMar yew.
I Heinle hNilh Gft servia!S iltl! iritcl b 2CO visfb ptr
)'Iii'.
• ~""--•linile4b100dop,.. ...... , . , - - .
• PT, OT, ST, ft dircp~ 5ff'f'iaeslmJied lo 8Ja:mllirwdvisib per merdler percllefuiat)ltar.

Clil--

• ~ho!pWaalcr~srte(llr.~s.
• YCMJ Llm!nos HSApbt lrlcMiles an rinttcll Uetime rnmrun, rneniNrbr ft. n cut cfJM:twcrk serricft

Phocriplion llnagt- no copay -doducti>lo ('bon pll,_from • - phann>cy')

lWs ,..,.,..,., - b "'' loeeft updated 1o """li'frm- ""'-.........,.,., Od<dog ilflll-,......,, dlhe!OCEftlly
enactedftdetal ht.l'411 an N!bm 13M. As we reoeM~I ~ .w1 darifica&:J'I 01\ Nnewhe.:!llhcattrebm lawsfrrtn 1te US.
~o/-and-SeNiou,O.,-dloiorand--SeM:o,wt!MJM.......,bl!\1ke­

dl.v9e•lo !lis SIIM\OI'f o/ ~Entfils.

II you have quesHons, please call toll-free 1·888-224-4896.
CGHSA605w mlb....,. (1114)

(007SS217.DOCX Ver. I)

53

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary

Anthem.+.W

lth 111001"111 J W lli\IU GfN liiiii'IU lfllt ftdftlfl jlliMIH!ifttH IW ltf'ltlll !UfJ. 11 iS~(( W-.:1 10181
OJqiiKe 1ft ttUUitltll Clllhr J:'P. tiiiiVIRl!J• IW I fit ... lrlOI! wnntff(n.W,.,,_ JltJ*I. .JUIII 11M
iii!JIIilfedc.... r!l rlli:rH, 'fO' !dill krclft IMlUVJ llrJ.

Anthem.+.W
Lun1en~
ll tM!ICIOtt, Allkn 1111 Qall Mil Rltlkilllllal to l i t - tf llli\Hlllhfl PWI. ate. Ill NIW liiQIIt8AlifltrtllttCfCIIUd Ill SliltU liiiM trldl_,lfAJ~ Flits
lf..,_lill{m,tiJ(.II-.,IIIt•._CI'IIMIIflu.JQtiiJNIIU,._olf.IIOtn!Wil"-GI'*"'-.,II• •IIlt"MMMIIIIM
... Outs N 1U U.tll biXbkn tlq:IJlnl fU!b lUI Ct!lti lid liM IMid.lUttbtbl • ~IJIOI k a.~-d 1ndiDt.

If you have questions. please can tol~free 1·8813-224·4896.
CGHSA605wiftcRKCOfiOJSNGFIV14)

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

54

APPENDIXD
DENTAL PLAN

(

Town of Seymour Police
Dental Plan
HOW IT WORKS

Thls dental plan p1ovides coverage for a wide1ange of dental services up to contractual
maxilnums listed below per insured pe•~o" per calendar year for the sel'l'ices listed
below:
·
(CATEGORY l) DIAGNOSTIC AND PR:EVENTITIVE SERVlCES
Payable at 100% ofusual, customary and reasonable charges at pattic!patlng dentislll!
• Initial ornl exams •·1135months
• Periodic Oralexar~~s- 2/Year
• Prophylaxis- 2/Year
• Topical application of Fluoride- 2/Year to age 19
• Space mal!tlldners to age 19
• X-rays
• llme~gency Ticatment
Unlimited Maximum with c~tegory 1, J, ~.

c

(CATEGORY 2) BASIC SERVlCES
Payable at80% of usual, customary and rusonable cbaxges at pattiolpating dentists:
• Filllngs
• Root canals
Deductible: $50 Individual
$150 Family
• Staplles~ steel o.t'\l~ (Prilnary Teeth)
Family:
• Exttactions
• Otal Swgety
• Repair of dentures - 1/Yeat
• · Relining of dentures -1/2 Years
• Recement orown
• Rocement btidge ·
• Repair blidge
Unlimited Maximum wl'lh catego~y 1, 2, 3.
(CATEGORY .3) MAJOR SERVlCES
Payable at 50% ofusual, customary and reasonable chatges at pattlcipating dentist!:
• Crowns-1/'rooth/5 Years
• Post andcore-1/'rooth/5 Yeats
Deductible: $50 Tndlvldual
• Inlays- 1/rooth/5 Yeats
Family:
$150 Family
• Onlays- 1/Tooth/5 Years
• Periodontics
• Plosthodontlcs- 1/rooth/5 Yeats
Unlimited Maximum with category 1, 2, 3.

{00755217.DOCXVer. I)

55

.•

. ,;

Town of Seymour PoJice
Dental Plan Continued
(CATEGORY 4) ADDITIONAL SERVICES
Payable at SO% of usual, customary lllld reasonable charges at pal'tiolpatingdenlfsts:
• Otthod.ontics
Mtcdmum of$1, 000 per lifelime.

}'!inolpa! Limitations and Exc!usiMs:

c

SOJVlees received from a dental or medJca! department malntaJned by an employer, a
mutual benefit assoclatiOJt, labor unio.n, uustee or other slmllat· penon or group; SO!Vices
tor which the member Inoms no Dectista' Chat~ or which arc sctvlces of a type
o.tdinatily petfotmed by a physician, or ohwges wb!oh would not have been made if
insursnce was not available; S01vices with respect to congenitalmalfonnations, Services,
trcatmellt or supplies furnished by or. at the dit'OOtion of' any govemrnent, sfllle or politioal
subdivision: Any items not speeifioally listed in this Policy: Lost.or stolen dentures or·
· denture duplication; Gold foil restotations; Temporu:y services and ep)l!fanoes; such as
orown ox tooth preparations and tempomy Jl!Jings, orowns, brid~s and dentutcs;
Application of sealants, regardle:~s of reason; S01vlces as detetmined by tho company,
thot are tendered in a manner contzary to nonnal don tal praotloo. Thill is not a /ega/
policy or contract.· It Is only a g6nerol d•.rcrlplfon of your A.nthem :Blue Cross & !J/ue
Shield benej/Js. !(there are dtsCJ'epanci<S between the dtnta/ rider· anrf this summary, tire
dental rider shall control.

{007SS217.DOCXVer.l)

56

APPENDIXE

MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT

Between the
Town of Seymour and the Seymour Police Union, Local #564 and Council 15
WHEREAS, the Town and the Union disagree regarding the interpretation of the postretirement benefits provision of Article 17, Section I (D); and
WHEREAS, the Union's position is that the original bargaining intent was that retiree
group medical insurance provided by the Town from the date of retirement until age 65 would
cover not only retirees and their eligible spouses but also eligible dependent children, and that
such coverage includes dental and vision coverage; and
WHEREAS, the Town has been providing group medical insurance, including dental and
vision coverage, to retired police officers, and their eligible spouses and children,
notwithstanding the contractual language which states that retirees and/or spouses will retain the
same medical coverage but does not expressly mention eligible dependent children; and
WHEREAS, the parties wish to resolve this disagreement and dispute;
NOW THEREFORE, the Town and the Union agree as follows:
I.
The language of Section I (D) shall apply to all employees hired prior to March I,
2015 and shall be interpreted to mean that such retirees (if single coverage), and their eligible
spouses and their eligible dependents (if two person or family coverage) will retain the same
medical plan and coverage, including prescription coverage and any dental and vision coverage,
they had on the day before the effective date of retirement until the retiree and/or spouse reaches
the age of 65. Should said plan be a HDHP, the Town agrees to fund the HDHP in the same
manner and in the same amount as it had on the day before the effective date of retirement. The
Town will provide to retirees at and over the age of 65, and/or their eligible spouse when he/she
reaches age 65, Blue Cross 65 High Option and Blue Shield 65-82, or if that plan is discontinued,
the most comparable available Medicare supplement plan. Premiums for all retirees and any
eligible spouse shall be paid in full by the Town. Retirees shall have no premium cost share
during their retirement and will remain secure with the same policy throughout their retirement
as they were covered by on day one of their retirement.
2.
In exchange for the Town agreeing to the above interpretation, the parties agree
that the following shall apply to all employees hired on or after March I, 20 IS:
For employees hired on or after March I, 2015 who reach age 55 or older, have a total of
at least 25 years of service, and are eligible for and take Normal Retirement, the Town will
provide the retiree only with the same group medical coverage, including prescription coverage
but excluding any and all dental and vision coverage, provided to active employees until the
retiree reaches the age of 65. Retirees will be subject to the same plan changes made for active

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

57

employees and will pay the same premium cost share as active employees. If the plan is a
HDHP, the Town shall not fund any part of any HSA or HRA and shall not make any deductible
contribution. If allowed under the plan or policy, an eligible spouse and the retiree's eligible
dependent children may purchase the same group medical coverage as provided to the eligible
spouses and dependent children of active employees, excluding dental or vision coverage, by
paying the full amount of the premiums.
2. The provisions of Section I (D) of Article 17 shall apply to all employees regardless of
their date of hire who suffer a disabling in-the-line-of-duty injury and are granted a Disability
Retirement. In addition, in the event that such a disabled retiree becomes employed after the
effective date of his/her Disability Retirement and the employer offers group medical insurance
to employees, their spouses and eligible dependent children, the retiree must obtain the group
medical insurance coverage offered by the employer for as long as he or she remains employed
and must notify the Town in writing of the new employment and their participation in the group
medical insurance plan offered by the employer. While coverage is being provided by another
employer, the Town will discontinue providing group medical insurance coverage to the retiree
and his/her eligible dependents. Should said retiree leave employment with the successor
employer, said retiree, his or her spouse, and his or her eligible dependent children, upon receipt
of written notice thereof by the Town, shall have coverage through the Town reinstated in
accordance with the parameters of Section !(D) of Article 17 and the terms and conditions of the
then applicable policy and plan. If a retiree secures employment with an employer that provides
group medical insurance and the retiree fails to so notify the Town, the Town shall have the right
to terminate the group medical insurance coverage provided to the retiree and/or his or her
eligible dependents.
Signed and effective this __ day of March, 2015.
THE TOWN OF SEYMOUR:

THE SEYMOUR POLICE UNION LOCAL
#564, AFSCME, AFL-CIO

By: _____~------W. Kurt Miller
First Selectman

By: ___-,---------,----Todd Romagna, Its President
By: __=---~-=-~~~
Representative, Council #15
AFSCME, AFL-CIO

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

58

APPENDIXF

The Cooper Institute Fitness Standards

The Cooper Institute Fitness Standards (Male 40%)
Age
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60 +

Push ups
29
24
18

13
10

Sit ups

38
35
29
24
19

1.5 mile run
12:29
12:53
13:50
15:14
17:19

Note: The Cooper Institute does not have established standards for males 19 Y, years of age in all
categories; therefore, these applicants will be held to the 20-29 male standards.

The Cooper Institute Fitness Standards (Female 40%)
Age
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60 +

Push ups
15
II
9
12 (m)
5 (m)

Sit ups
32
25
20
14
6

1.5 mile run
15:05
15:56
17:11
19:10
20:55

Note: The Cooper Institute does not have established standards for females 19 Y, years of age in
all categories; therefore, they will be held to the 20-29 female standards. **(m) - represents
modified.

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

59

APPENDIX C
HDHP PLAN SUMMARY

Lumenos HSA Plan Summary

Anthem.+.V

The lum3..:>s• Ht/1 piJn is dt~g~~ed to e.~p~~er )VU to hkll control ot )IJU heiltl\ as wei a~
me dOII3t3\'0l spend on your hea 1/1 cart IhiS plangiles ,au tne ben!ntl you -..uuld rea~ve
iu.ma liPI~ tealth pin\ plus hralth Cllf Cellars to sperd your way. ml )ou'l tme
;cc~ss to pemn~li 1ed senim <Vld cnlhe ho's lo hrlpyou rtach ,~"health p>lential.

Your Lumen'" HS/1 Plan

Firat - Use your HS4 to p.:1y for 00\VIed sel'tioes:
HNlt h S~vings Account

Wth the lllllfllos ~3Ith 5.:1\;ngs kcoU>~t (HSA), )'011 c:.:ll'l
cc.nlnltt p1e-bx clofliltS to yourHSA >lco:JIIll Others lll;)y ,.·~
cc.nlrllltt cloiiJrs to ycu ii<:CO.Ir~. YCN ro~ vst tfo~~ clollilt5 to
~.Ep mEEt )'0111 ill'lrw t d!dliCiitlt rHFOr.siblity. ~used doflilt5
Cilll be 5>1\'td Of rwt~ltd 11n1 >ICCI.Il11ill1e flrc.u~ rt6remEnl.

Contributions to Your HSA
FOf 2015, C<ltlll't:llfOM CJ/1 be m:1Cie to ycur H5A ~ lo lilt fo&\\Yig:
$3,3~ inchi!WI 00\'tr~ge
$6,650 fillllily ()0\'W;J)t
to.olt: Tr.t,. l mb•~~Jio til w-b'IIM «nrb.lionsflorn •·y ...,... i-d•dng

liSA 6:1W. r.o~ nco-li.u

Eam M or-• Morwy for Your Account

Healthy Rewards

V1~'s sptci~ ~ yW~lilmErlos HSA p·~ 1$ thll1 you m>IY
e>~m ;J:Idton.lol f.n:ls lot ycur he;~ Ill! ~ tlllougllllle

If you do thia:
You ean Nlll thit in your H5A:
Cofll'lelt the Ht.ll:h AsstssmEnt orlir.e
$50
Enol ill tfo.e Pe<sa~.i HNIIIl ~ P~Qirillll
$100
Graal.r.Xe 6:om 1M Pft1011.11 Heall!l Cooxll PtogrJm
$200
Cof\l'ltlt our Smokir.g Ctss.lliorl f'ttv>~ m
$~
Cofll'lete w r V.'e.~ t.\;)1\))em!!rl Prog•>~m
$~

Hu~y R~,'l'ls iloentive progr.~m.

To ,.~,,.&,~umod tu...ghlht Hetlfy RN•1f•F"9""1)"' ""'~

..,,,. "'~· liSA OAltlloi.C.netn< u ril o·.ol.-tJ ,!,e·U IIw;h 'AIIidl
!""-' trtPaJ" ~ ~"""'9

1"' HSA.

Plua - To htlpyou sby h~ltlly, use:
Pn!V.ntive CMe
100% OOIIEQJt ftt nJtiCI1i!lly ~COfMIEflliled 5er\'OPS.
lne\ded ..,, lilt pre~tntive c.lM! sel'tioes lh:lt 11\fEI lilt
~.li.oemetls ftderill <J'Id sb1e IJN, includ"nJ oerbi~
sctta~iol9s, irrml.rlizJtions il'ld Fl'rys ci<~'~ \i sits

a

Prevtntiv• Care
Ko d!<iUctions flcrn the HSI\ et ol.t-of-Fcd!l costs for you iiS long iiS )'all
1eeeive y.ow pttvEnlil•t c:w ~11 <~'~ iil-nEtt.oootc pro\ialer. If )'011 dloose 1o
go1o .:1ft oul-of-I'A!II'IOrk f>JO\;dEt, fOW Cled iletit~e Ot Tr;Jdtm ;Jl I'.Eolllll
CovEt31Jf W\f{ts y,tu '1!~1y.

n-Your Bridg• Responsibility
The Br:.d,e is ill'l iii'IIOII!o! you p.:1y 014 of )'OUt pocliEt un!ll )'011
rr.eet your >~riiY31 6Eductlte ~e11s"bilfy. Y0111 b idgt ;JIIl0Lf1J
.,.;n Vili'Y lileptfoodil~ 011 hCII'I m:~r.y of yow HSAciO IS, d ill'ly,
)'011 cfloost to 5pfl'lcllo hflp )'OU meE-1 'fWI ;JIIIIUJI ~le
l'fSIIOISiblly. r ~ OCI'I!ibLte HSA ciO IllS~ 1o li'A! ili!IO'. ri c.l
)'OW dtdo.ldib't ill'lcl vst li'..em, your Br:.dgt Yiti ...JI $0.
HSA doiiJrs SPfl'i on w.'M<f str\•oes pus ycur Srd,e
tfSIIOISiblily ildtl ~ 1o yow <J'InY\11 ~b'.e mponsbl ty.
Heilhh Aoco~r~t +Bridge =Deductible

IINttdtd Tradilional Health Cov.rage
Ywr Tr.lilltion31 1'.t31tliCovEr..Jt~ilsafteJ)'OU hol\'t mEt
ywr:Br:.d,e mpoMibl ity.

Bridge
Your :Br"dgt mpor.sib lity 1\iU\llty.

Annual Otductiblt RMpoBSibilily
$2,000 iolol\i!WI cxn-erJge
$4,000 fil111ily 00\'ef;JJf

Traditional Health CovH~ge

Alltr your bridg•, the pl~n p1ya:
100'll lorill-nE'!Notlc ~to">ililers

If ~'Otl h;wrl CJ IIP.!".tions. p!P.ase C<ll l tnll-frr.n 1-R8R-22ll-4R96.

{AJ.LI).A._

{007552 17.DOCX Ver. I}

CGHSA60Sr1 ir.o Rlt oop.:~~ NGF (11141

51

Section 2.
This Agreement shall be retroactive to the 1st day of July, 2014, and shall
continue in full force and effect until midnight on June 30, 2020, and from year to year thereafter
unless written notice is served by either party to the Agreement no less than one-hundred twenty
(120) days prior to the expiration of this Agreement that modifications or changes be made in the
Agreement in which case the parties shall negotiate a new Agreement and shall schedule a
meeting within thirty (30) days for such a purpose.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused their names to be signed this 16th
day of March 2015.
FOR THE SEYMOUR POLICE
UNION LOCAL #564, AFSCME,
AFL-CIO

FOR THE TOWN OF SEYMOUR

84=B~
BY: _____________________

{00755217.DOCX Ver. I}

33
